         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                      [No. 2 of 2016            9




                  GOVERNMENT OF ZAMBIA


                             ACT
                             No. 2 of 2016

Date of Assent: 5th January, 2016

        An Act to amend the Constitution of Zambia.
                              [ 5th January, 2016
ENACTED by the Parliament of Zambia.                                            Enactment
  1. This Act may be cited as the Constitution of Zambia                            Short title
(Amendment) Act, 2016, and shall be read as one with the
Constitution of Zambia, in this Act referred to as the Constitution.            Cap. 1
  2. The Constitution is amended by the repeal of the Preamble                      Repeal and
and the substitution therefor of the following:                                     replacement
                                                                                    of Preamble

                                PREAMBLE
   WE, THE PEOPLE OF ZAMBIA:
   ACKNOWLEDGE the supremacy of God Almighty;
  DECLARE the Republic a Christian Nation while upholding a
person’s right to freedom of conscience, belief or religion;
  UPHOLD the human rights and fundamental freedoms of every
person;
  COMMIT ourselves to upholding the principles of democracy and
good governance;
   RESOLVE to ensure that our values relating to family, morality,
patriotism and justice are maintained and all functions of the State
are performed in our common interest;
   CONFIRM the equal worth of women and men and their right to
freely participate in, determine and build a sustainable political, legal,
economic and social order;

            Single copies of this Act may be obtained from the Government Printer
                        P.O. Box 30136, 10101 Lusaka. Price K220.00
   10    No. 2 of 2016]           Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                 RECOGNISE AND UPHOLD the multi-ethnic, multi-racial, multi-religious
               and multi-cultural character of our Nation and our right to manage
               our affairs and resources sustainably in a devolved system of
               governance;
                 RESOLVE that Zambia shall remain a unitary, multi-party and
               democratic sovereign State;
                  RECOGNISE AND HONOUR the freedom fighters who fought for the
               independence of our Nation in order to achieve liberty, justice
               and unity for the people of Zambia;
                 AND DIRECT that all State organs and State institutions abide by
               and respect our sovereign will;

                    DO HEREBY SOLEMNLY ADOPT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
                                      CONSTITUTION:
Repeal and       3. The Constitution is amended by the repeal of Parts I and II
replacement    and the substitution therefor of the following Parts:
of Parts I
and II
                                              PART I
                                    SUPREMACY OF CONSTITUTION
Supremacy         1. (1) This Constitution is the supreme law of the Republic of
of             Zambia and any other written law, customary law and customary
Constitution
               practice that is inconsistent with its provisions is void to the extent
               of the inconsistency.
                   (2)     An act or omission that contravenes this Constitution is
               illegal.
                  (3) This Constitution shall bind all persons in Zambia, State
               organs and State institutions.
                 (4) The validity or legality of this Constitution is not subject to
               challenge by or before a State organ or other forum.
                 (5) A matter relating to this Constitution shall be heard by the
               Constitutional Court.
Defence of        2.      Every person has the right and duty to—
Constitution
                    (a) defend this Constitution; and
                    (b) resist or prevent a person from overthrowing, suspending
                           or illegally abrogating this Constitution.
Continuous        3. The operation of this Constitution shall not be affected by
effect of      an unlawful act to overthrow, suspend or illegally abrogate its
Constitution
               provisions.
         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                   [No. 2 of 2016       11

   4. (1) Zambia is a sovereign Republic under a constitutional             Republic of
                                                                            Zambia
form of governance.
  (2) The Republic consists of the territory defined in an Act of
Parliament.
  (3) The Republic is a unitary, indivisible, multi-ethnic, multi-racial,
multi-religious, multi-cultural and multi-party democratic State.
   (4) The Republic shall not be ceded in whole or in part.
   (5) The Republic may enter into a union or other form of inter-
state organisation, which action shall not be construed as ceding
the Republic.
   5. (1) Sovereign authority vests in the people of Zambia, which          Sovereign
                                                                            authority
may be exercised directly or through elected or appointed
representatives or institutions.
  (2) Power that is not conferred by or under this Constitution on
any State organ, State institution, State officer, Constitutional office
holder or other institution or person is reserved for the people.
   (3) The people of Zambia shall exercise their reserved power
through a referendum, as prescribed.
   6. (1) The national symbols of the Republic are the—                     National
                                                                            symbols
      (a) National Flag;
      (b) National Anthem;
      (c) Coat of Arms;
      (d) Public Seal; and
      (e) National Motto.
  (2) The form, words, description and use of the national symbols
shall be as prescribed.
   7. The Laws of Zambia consist of—                                        Laws of
                                                                            Zambia
      (a) this Constitution;
      (b) laws enacted by Parliament;
      (c) statutory instruments;
      (d) Zambian customary law which is consistent with this
           Constitution; and
      (e) the laws and statutes which apply or extend to Zambia,
           as prescribed.
   12      No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                                               PART II
                        NATIONAL VALUES, PRINCIPLES AND ECONOMIC POLICIES
National          8.    The national values and principles are—
values and
principles             (a) morality and ethics;
                       (b) patriotism and national unity;
                       (c) democracy and constitutionalism;
                       (d) human dignity, equity, social justice, equality and non-
                            discrimination;
                       (e) good governance and integrity; and
                       (f) sustainable development.
Application       9. (1) The national values and principles shall apply to the —
of national
values and             (a) interpretation of this Constitution;
principles
                       (b) enactment and interpretation of the law; and
                       (c) development and implementation of State policy.
                  (2) The President shall, once in every year, report to the National
               Assembly the progress made in the application of the values and
               principles specified under this Part.
Basis of         10. (1) The Government shall create an economic environment
economic
policies
               which encourages individual initiative and self-reliance among the
               people, so as to promote investment, employment and wealth.
                  (2) The Government shall promote the economic empowerment
               of citizens so that they contribute to sustainable economic growth
               and social development.
                 (3) The Government shall promote local and foreign investment
               and protect and guarantee such investment through agreements
               with investors and other countries.
                  (4) The Government shall not compulsorily acquire an investment,
               except under customary international law and subject to Article 16
               (1).
                  (5) Where the investment compulsorily acquired under clause
               (4) was made from the proceeds of crime no compensation shall
               be paid by the Government.
Repeal and        4. The Constitution is amended by the repeal of Part IV and
replacement    the substitution therefor of the following Part:
of Part IV
         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016        13

                             PART IV
                             CITIZENSHIP
   33. A person who was a citizen of Zambia, immediately before          Existing
                                                                         citizenship
the commencement of this Constitution, shall continue to be a citizen
of Zambia and shall retain the same citizenship category from the
date the citizenship was acquired.
  34.   Citizenship may be acquired by birth, descent, registration      Categories
                                                                         of citizenship
or adoption in accordance with this Part.
  35. (1) A person born in Zambia is a citizen by birth if, at the       Citizenship
                                                                         by birth
date of that person’s birth, at least one parent of that person is or
was a citizen.
   (2) A child found in Zambia who is, or appears to be, of not
more than eight years of age and whose nationality and parents
are not known, shall be presumed to be a citizen by birth.
  (3)    For the purposes of this Part, a person born aboard—
     (a) a registered ship or aircraft of a country, shall be deemed
           to have been born in the country of registration of the
           ship or aircraft; or
     (b) an unregistered ship or aircraft of a country, shall be
          deemed to have been born in that country.
   36. A person born outside Zambia is a citizen by descent if, at       Citizenship
                                                                         by descent
the date of that person’s birth, at least one parent of that person is
or was a citizen by birth or descent.
   37. (1) Subject to clause (2), a person is entitled to apply to       Citizenship
                                                                         by
the Citizenship Board of Zambia to be registered as a citizen if that    registration
person has attained the age of eighteen years and—
     (a) was born in Zambia and has been ordinarily resident in
          Zambia for a period of at least five years;
     (b) was born outside Zambia, has or had an ancestor who is,
          or was, a citizen and has been ordinarily resident in
          Zambia for a period of at least five years; or
     (c) has been ordinarily resident in Zambia for a continuous
           period of at least ten years;
immediately preceding that person’s application for registration, as
prescribed.
    14      No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                      (2) Notwithstanding clause (1), a person who is, or was married
                   to a citizen, for a period of at least five years, is entitled to apply to
                   the Citizenship Board of Zambia, to be registered as a citizen, as
                   prescribed.
Citizenship          38. A child who is not a citizen and who is adopted by a citizen
by adoption        shall be a citizen on the date of the adoption.
Dual                  39. (1) A citizen shall not lose citizenship by acquiring the
citizenship
                   citizenship of another country.
                      (2) A citizen who ceased to be a citizen, before the
                   commencement of this Constitution as a result of acquiring the
                   citizenship of another country, shall be entitled to apply, as
                   prescribed, to the Citizenship Board of Zambia, for citizenship and
                   the Citizenship Board of Zambia shall bestow citizenship on that
                   person.
Renunciation          40.   (1) A citizen—
and
deprivation              (a) may renounce citizenship as prescribed; or
of
citizenship              (b) shall be deprived of citizenship if that citizenship was
                               acquired by means of fraud, false representation or
                               concealment of a material fact.
                      (2) The process and procedures to be followed by the
                   Citizenship Board of Zambia when granting or depriving a person
                   of citizenship shall be prescribed.
Citizenship           41.   (1) There is established the Citizenship Board of Zambia.
Board of
Zambia               (2) The composition, appointment and tenure of office of
                   members of, and procedures to be followed by, the Citizenship
                   Board of Zambia shall be prescribed.
Entitlements          42.   A citizen is entitled to—
of citizen
                         (a) the rights, privileges and benefits of citizenship as provided
                               in this Constitution or as prescribed; and
                         (b) a document of identification issued by the State to citizens.
Responsibilities      43.   (1) A citizen shall —
of citizen
                         (a) be patriotic to Zambia and promote its development and
                               good image;
                         (b) pay taxes and duties lawfully due and owing to the State;
                         (c) protect and conserve the environment and utilise natural
                               resources in a sustainable manner;
         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                    [No. 2 of 2016        15

      (d) maintain a clean and healthy environment;
      (e) provide national, defence and military service when called
            upon by the State; and
      (f) co-operate with law enforcement agencies for the
           maintenance and enforcement of law and order.
   (2)   A citizen shall endeavour to—
      (a) acquire basic understanding of this Constitution and
           promote its ideals and objectives;
      (b) register and vote, if eligible, in national and local government
            elections and referenda;
      (c) develop one’s abilities to the greatest possible extent
           through acquisition of knowledge, continuous learning
           and the development of skills;
      (d) foster national unity and live in harmony with others; and
      (e) understand and enhance Zambia’s place in the international
            community.
   44. A reference in this Part to the citizenship of the parent of          Reference to
a person at the time of the birth of that person shall, in relation to a     citizenship
                                                                             of parent
person born after the death of that person’s parent, be construed
as a reference to the citizenship of the parent at the time of the
parent’s death.
                            PART V
                   REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE
                 Electoral Systems and Process
   45. (1) The electoral systems provided for in Article 47 for              Principles of
the election of President, Member of Parliament or councillor shall          electoral
                                                                             systems and
ensure—                                                                      process

      (a) that citizens are free to exercise their political rights;
      (b) universal adult suffrage based on the equality of a vote;
      (c) fair representation of the various interest groups in society;
             and
      (d) gender equity in the National Assembly or council.
  (2) The electoral process and system of administering elections
shall ensure—
   16       No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                     (a) that elections are free and fair;
                     (b) that elections are free from violence, intimidation and
                           corruption;
                     (c) independence, accountability, efficiency and transparency
                           of the electoral process;
                     (d) a simple and practical system of voting and tabulating
                           votes; and
                     (e) timely resolution of electoral disputes.
Franchise          46. A citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years is entitled
                to be registered as a voter and vote in an election by secret ballot.
Electoral          47. (1) Elections to the office of President shall be conducted
systems
                directly, under a majoritarian electoral system, where the winning
                candidate must receive more than fifty percent of the valid votes
                cast, and in accordance with Article 101.
                   (2) Elections to the National Assembly shall be conducted under
                a first-past-the-post electoral system in accordance with Article
                68.
                   (3) Elections to councils shall be conducted under a first-past-
                the-post electoral system, and in accordance with Articles 153 and
                154.
                    (4) A constituency and a ward shall return only one member
                to the National Assembly and council, respectively.
Electoral          48. The electoral process for electing a President, Member
process
                of Parliament or councillor shall be prescribed.
System for         49.   The system of administering elections shall be prescribed.
administering
elections

Access to          50. A political party and a candidate contesting an election
media
                shall have access to the media, especially during election campaigns.
Independent       51. A person is eligible for election as an independent
candidates
                candidate for a National Assembly seat if the person—
                     (a) is not a member of a political party and has not been a
                           member of a political party for at least two months
                           immediately before the date of the election; and
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016       17

     (b) meets the qualifications specified in Article 70 for election
           as a Member of Parliament.
  52.   (1) A candidate shall file that candidate’s nomination paper     Nominations

to a returning officer, supported by an affidavit stating that the
candidate is qualified for nomination as President, Member of
Parliament or councillor, in the manner, on the day, and at the time
and place set by the Electoral Commission by regulation.
  (2)   A returning officer shall, immediately on the filing of a
nomination paper, in accordance with clause (1), duly reject the
nomination paper if the candidate does not meet the qualifications
or procedural requirements specified for election to that office.
  (3)   The information contained in a nomination paper and
affidavit shall be published by the Electoral Commission, as
prescribed.

  (4)   A person may challenge, before a court or tribunal, as
prescribed, the nomination of a candidate within seven days of the
close of nomination and the court shall hear the case within twenty-
one days of its lodgement.

  (5)   The processes specified in clauses (1) to (4) shall be
completed at least thirty days before a general election.
  (6)   Where a candidate dies, resigns or becomes disqualified in
accordance with Article 70, 100 or 153 or a court disqualifies a
candidate for corruption or malpractice, after the close of
nominations and before the election date, the Electoral Commission
shall cancel the election and require the filing of fresh nominations
by eligible candidates and elections shall be held within thirty days
of the filing of the fresh nominations.

  53.   (1) Where only one candidate is nominated for election           Unopposed
                                                                         candidates
as President, Member of Parliament or councillor, by the date and
time set by the Electoral Commission for receiving nominations
and at the close of the nomination period, that candidate shall be
declared duly elected.
   18       No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                     (2) A person may, within seven days of a declaration made in
                  accordance with clause (1), challenge the declaration, as
                  prescribed.
                    (3) The processes specified in clauses (1) and (2) shall be
                  completed at least thirty days before a general election.
Electoral            54. A candidate and a political party shall comply with a
code of
conduct           prescribed electoral code of conduct.

Losing               55. A candidate who loses an election as a President, Vice-
candidate         President, Member of Parliament or councillor is not eligible, during
not eligible
for certain       the term of that National Assembly or council, for appointment
appointments      as—
                       (a) Minister; or
                       (b) Provincial Minister.
Election date        56. (1) A general election shall be held, every five years after
for general       the last general election, on the second Thursday of August.
elections
                     (2) The day on which a general election is held shall be a public
                  holiday.
By-elections        57. (1) Where a vacancy occurs in the office of Member of
                  Parliament, mayor, council chairperson or councillor, a by-election
                  shall be held within ninety days of the occurrence of the vacancy.
                     (2) A by-election shall not be held within the one hundred-and-
                  eighty day period that precedes a general election.
                    (3) The Electoral Commission shall, by regulation, set the place
                  where, and the date and time when, a by-election is to be held.
                             Constituencies, Wards and Delimitation
Constituencies,      58. (1) Zambia shall be divided into constituencies and wards
wards and
delimitation      for purposes of elections to the National Assembly and councils,
                  respectively.
                     (2) The number of constituencies shall be equal to the number
                  of seats of elected members in the National Assembly.
                    (3)   The number of wards in a district shall be prescribed.
                    (4) The Electoral Commission shall determine the names and
                  boundaries of constituencies and wards.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)              [No. 2 of 2016 19

   (5) The Electoral Commission shall, at intervals of not more
than ten years, review the names and boundaries of constituencies
and wards.
   (6) The names and details of the boundaries of constituencies
and wards shall be published in the Gazette and shall come into
effect on the next dissolution of Parliament or councils.
   (7) A person may apply to the Constitutional Court for review
of a decision of the Electoral Commission made under this Article.
   59. The Electoral Commission shall, in delimiting the boundaries   Matters to
of constituencies and wards—                                          take into
                                                                      account
     (a) take into account the history, diversity and cohesiveness    when
                                                                      delimiting
           of the constituency or ward;                               constituencies
                                                                      and wards
     (b) have regard to population density, trends and projections;
     (c) ensure that the number of inhabitants in each constituency
           or ward is reasonable, taking into account the means of
           communication and geographical features;
     (d) ensure that constituencies and wards are wholly within
          districts; and
     (e) seek to achieve an approximate equality of constituency
           and ward population, subject to the need to ensure
           adequate representation for urban and sparsely populated
           areas.
                         Political Parties
  60.    (1) A political party has the right to—                      Political
                                                                      parties
     (a) disseminate information on social and economic
          programmes of a national character and of its political
          ideology;
     (b) sponsor candidates for election or nomination to a State
           office in respect of which elections are required to be
           held; and
     (c) conduct primary elections for the selection of candidates.
  (2)    A political party shall—
     (a) promote the values and principles specified in this
          Constitution;
     (b) have a national character;
     (c) promote and uphold national unity;
  20    No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                    (d) promote and practice democracy through regular, free
                         and fair elections within the party;
                    (e) respect the right of its members to participate in the affairs
                          of the political party;
                    (f) respect the right of its members to seek redress from a
                          court or tribunal when aggrieved by a decision of the
                          political party; and
                    (g) subscribe to and observe the code of conduct for political
                          parties, as prescribed.
                  (3)A political party shall not—
                    (a) be founded on a religious, linguistic, racial, ethnic, tribal,
                          gender, sectoral or provincial basis or engage in
                          propaganda based on any of these factors;
                    (b) engage in or encourage violence or intimidate its members,
                          supporters, opponents or other persons;
                    (c) engage in corrupt practices; and
                    (d) except as prescribed, use public resources to promote its
                          interest or that of its members.
                  (4) The following shall be prescribed with regard to political
               parties:
                    (a) the establishment and management of a Political Parties’
                          Fund to provide financial support to political parties with
                          seats in the National Assembly;
                    (b) the accounts of political parties which are funded under
                          the Political Parties’ Fund and the submission of audited
                          accounts by political parties;
                    (c) the sources of funds for political parties;
                    (d) the maximum amount of money to be used for campaigns
                          during elections; and
                    (e) matters incidental to matters specified in this clause.
Renumbering       5. The Constitution is amended by the renumbering of Part V
and renaming
of Part V      as Part VI, and the deletion of the heading to that Part and the
               substitution therefor of the following heading and sub-heading:
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                  [No. 2 of 2016        21

                             LEGISLATURE
                      Legislative Authority
  6. The Constitution is amended by the repeal of Articles 62 to            Repeal and
                                                                            replacement
78 inclusive and the substitution therefor of the following:                of Articles 62
                                                                            to 78
     61. The legislative authority of the Republic derives from             Principles of
       the people of Zambia and shall be exercised in a manner              legislative
                                                                            authority
       that protects this Constitution and promotes the democratic
       governance of the Republic.
  62. (1) There is established the Parliament of Zambia which               Parliament,
consists of the President and the National Assembly.                        vesting of
                                                                            legislative
  (2) The legislative authority of the Republic is vested in and            authority
                                                                            and
exercised by Parliament.                                                    Members of
                                                                            Parliament
  (3) A person or body, other than Parliament, shall not have
power to enact legislation, except as conferred by this Constitution.
  (4) A member of the National Assembly shall be referred to as
a Member of Parliament.
  63. (1) Parliament shall enact legislation through Bills passed           Functions of
by the National Assembly and assented to by the President.                  Parliament
                                                                            and National
  (2) The National Assembly shall oversee the performance of                Assembly
executive functions by—
     (a) ensuring equity in the distribution of national resources
           amongst the people of Zambia;
     (b) appropriating funds for expenditure by State organs, State
           institutions, provincial administration, local authorities and
           other bodies;
     (c) scrutinising public expenditure, including defence,
          constitutional and special expenditure;
     (d) approving public debt before it is contracted; and
     (e) approving international agreements and treaties before
           these are acceded to or ratified.
   64. (1) A Member of Parliament or Minister may introduce a               Introduction
Bill in the National Assembly.                                              of Bills in
                                                                            National
  (2) The expenses of drafting and introducing a Bill in the National       Assembly
Assembly shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
  65.   (1) A Money Bill shall be introduced by a Minister.                 Money Bills
   22    No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                 (2) A Money Bill means a Bill that provides for, among other
               matters—
                    (a) the imposition, repeal, remission, alteration or regulation
                          of taxes;
                    (b) the imposition of charges on the Consolidated Fund or
                          any other public fund, or the variation or repeal of any
                          of those charges;
                    (c) the appropriation, receipt, custody, investment, issue or
                          audit of accounts of public monies;
                    (d) the grant of public money to a person or authority or the
                          variation or revocation of such grant;
                    (e) the raising or guaranteeing of a loan or the repayment of
                          it; or
                    (f) matters incidental to matters specified in this clause.
                 (3) A Bill that confers emoluments on State officers or
               Constitutional office holders shall only be introduced in the National
               Assembly if the emoluments are recommended by the Emoluments
               Commission.
Presidential      66. (1) Where a Bill is presented to the President for assent,
assent and
referral       the President shall, within twenty-one days after receipt of the
               Bill—
                    (a) assent to the Bill; or
                    (b) refer the Bill to the National Assembly for reconsideration,
                          indicating any reservation that the President has
                          concerning the Bill.
                  (2) Where the President refers the Bill to the National Assembly
               for reconsideration, in accordance with clause (1) (b), the National
               Assembly may—
                    (a) amend the Bill taking into account the President’s
                         reservation; or
                    (b) pass the Bill, without amendment, by a vote supported by
                          at least two-thirds of the Members of Parliament.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016       23

  (3) Where the National Assembly passes the Bill with
amendments, in accordance with clause (2) (a), the Speaker shall
submit the Bill to the President for assent.
  (4) Where the National Assembly passes the Bill, in accordance
with clause (2) (b)—
     (a) the Speaker shall, within seven days of passing the Bill,
           resubmit the Bill to the President; and
     (b) the President shall, within seven days of receipt of the
           Bill, assent to the Bill.
    (5) Where the National Assembly fails to pass the Bill, in
accordance with clause (2) (b), the Bill shall not be presented to
the National Assembly in that session.
   (6) Where the President does not assent to a Bill within the
periods prescribed in clauses (1) and (4), the Bill shall be considered
assented to upon the expiry of those periods.
   67. (1) Article 62 or 63 shall not prevent Parliament from              Statutory
                                                                           instruments
conferring on a person or authority power to make statutory
instruments.
  (2)    A statutory instrument shall be published in the Gazette—
     (a) not later than twenty-eight days after it is made; or
     (b) in the case of a statutory instrument which will not have
           the force of law unless it is approved by a person or an
           authority, other than a person or an authority by which it
           was made, not later than twenty-eight days after it is so
           approved;
and if the statutory instrument is not so published, it is void from the
date on which it was made.
   (3) A person may challenge a statutory instrument, for its
constitutionality, within fourteen days of the publication of the
statutory instrument in the Gazette.
   (4) Where the Constitutional Court considers that a challenge
of a statutory instrument is frivolous or vexatious, the Constitutional
Court shall dismiss the action.
   (5) Where the Constitutional Court decides that a provision of
a statutory instrument is inconsistent with a provision of this
Constitution, that statutory instrument is void from the date on which
it was made.
   24     No. 2 of 2016]           Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                    (6)   A Member of Parliament who intends to challenge a
                 statutory instrument, on its constitutionality, shall follow the procedure
                 laid down in the Standing Orders of the National Assembly.
                  Elections to National Assembly and Members of Parliament

Election and        68.   (1) A Member of Parliament shall be elected in
composition
of National      accordance with Article 47 (2) and this Article.
Assembly
                    (2)   The National Assembly shall consist of—
                       (a) one hundred and fifty-six members directly elected on
                             the basis of a simple majority vote under the first-past-
                             the-post system;
                       (b) not more than eight nominated members;
                       (c) the Vice-President;
                       (d) the Speaker; and
                       (e) the First and Second Deputy Speakers.
Nominated           69.   (1) The President may nominate a person referred to in
Members of
Parliament       Article 68 (2) (b) where the President considers it necessary to
                 enhance the representation of special interests, skills or gender in
                 the National Assembly.
                    (2)   A person may be nominated as a Member of Parliament if
                 the person qualifies to be elected as such under Article 70.
                    (3)   A person who was a candidate for election in the last
                 preceding general election or a subsequent by-election is not eligible
                 to be nominated as a Member of Parliament
Qualifications      70. (1) Subject to clause (2), a person is eligible to be elected
and
disqualifica-    as a Member of Parliament, if that person—
tions of
Members of             (a) is a citizen;
Parliament
                       (b) is at least twenty-one years old;
                       (c) is a registered voter;
      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                  [No. 2 of 2016      25

     (d) has obtained, as a minimum academic qualification, a grade
           twelve certificate or its equivalent; and
     (e) declares that person’s assets and liabilities, as prescribed.
  (2) A person is disqualified from being elected as a Member of
Parliament if that person—
     (a) is validly nominated as a candidate in a presidential
           election;
     (b) is a public officer or Constitutional office holder;
     (c) is a judge or judicial officer;
     (d) has a mental or physical disability that would make the
           person incapable of performing the legislative function;
     (e) is an undischarged bankrupt;
     (f)     is serving a sentence of imprisonment for an offence
           under a written law;
     (g) has, in the immediate preceding five years, served a term
           of imprisonment of at least three years;
     (h) has, in the immediate preceding five years, been removed
           from public office on grounds of gross misconduct; or
     (i)     holds or is acting in an office, as prescribed, the
           functions of which involve or are connected with the
           conduct of elections.
    71. A nomination for election to the National Assembly is valid      Nominations
                                                                         for election
if the candidate—                                                        to National
                                                                         Assembly
     (a) has paid a prescribed election fee to the Electoral
          Commission; and
     (b) is supported by at least fifteen persons registered as voters
           in the constituency in which the candidate is standing
           for election.
   26     No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Vacation of       72. (1) A Member of Parliament shall, except the Speaker and
office as
Member of      the First Deputy Speaker, vacate the seat in the National Assembly
Parliament
and            upon a dissolution of Parliament.
dissolution
of political      (2) The office of Member of Parliament becomes vacant if
party
               the member—
                    (a) resigns by notice, in writing, to the Speaker;
                    (b) becomes disqualified for election in accordance with Article
                          70;
                    (c) acts contrary to a prescribed code of conduct;
                    (d) resigns from the political party which sponsored the member
                          for election to the National Assembly;
                    (e) is expelled from the political party which sponsored the
                           member for election to the National Assembly;
                    (f) ceases to be a citizen;
                    (g) having been elected to the National Assembly, as an
                         independent candidate, joins a political party;
                    (h) is disqualified as a result of a decision of the Constitutional
                           Court; or
                    (i) dies.
                 (3) The office of a nominated Member of Parliament becomes
               vacant if the member—
                    (a) resigns by notice, in writing, to the speaker;
                    (b) is disqualified under Article 70;
                    (c) acts contrary to a prescribed code of conduct;
                    (d) ceases to be a citizen;
                    (e) dies; or
                    (f) has the member’s nomination revoked by the President.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016   27

  (4)    A person who causes a vacancy in the National Assembly
due to the reasons specified under clause (2) (a), (b), (c), (d), (g)
and (h) shall not, during the term of that Parliament—

     (a) be eligible to contest an election; or

     (b) hold public office.

   (5) Where a Member of Parliament is expelled as provided in
clause (2) (e), the member shall not lose the seat until the expulsion
is confirmed by a court, except that where the member does not
challenge the expulsion in court and the period prescribed for
challenge lapses, the member shall vacate the seat in the National
Assembly.

  (6) Where a court determines that an expulsion of a member,
as provided in clause (2) (e), was not justified, there shall be no by-
election for that seat and the member shall opt to—

     (a) remain a member of the political party and retain the seat;
            or

     (b) resign from the political party and retain the seat as an
            independent member.

  (7) Where a court determines that an expulsion of a member,
as provided in clause (2) (e), was justified, the member shall vacate
the seat in the National Assembly.

  (8)    Where a vacancy occurs in the National Assembly, the
Speaker shall, within seven days of the occurrence of the vacancy,
inform the Electoral Commission of the vacancy, in writing, and a
by-election shall be held in accordance with Article 57.

  (9) If a political party is dissolved, a Member of Parliament
shall retain the member’s seat as an independent member.
   28     No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Petition of      73. (1) A person may file an election petition with the High
election of
Member of      Court to challenge the election of a Member of Parliament.
Parliament
                   (2) An election petition shall be heard within ninety days of the
               filing of the petition.
                   (3) A person may appeal against the decision of the High Court
               to the Constitutional Court.
                  (4) A Member of Parliament whose election is petitioned shall
               hold the seat in the National Assembly pending the determination
               of the election petition.
Leader of         74. (1) The President shall appoint the Vice-President to be
Government
Business and   the Leader of Government Business in the National Assembly.
Leader of
Opposition        (2) The opposition political party with the largest number of
               seats in the National Assembly shall elect a Leader of the Opposition
               from amongst the Members of Parliament who are from the
               opposition.
                                Proceedings of National Assembly
Sittings of       75. (1) The Speaker shall, within thirty days after a general
National
Assembly       election, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a date for the first sitting
               of the National Assembly for that term.
                  (2) There shall be at least three sittings of the National Assembly
               in a session of Parliament which shall be held at such times and on
               such days as the Speaker appoints.
                  (3) Notwithstanding clause (2), the President, or two-thirds of
               the Members of Parliament, may, in writing, request the Speaker to
               summon a sitting of the National Assembly, as prescribed.
Freedom of       76. (1) A Member of Parliament has freedom of speech and
speech,
powers,        debate in the National Assembly and that freedom shall not be
privileges
and            ousted or questioned in a court or tribunal.
immunities
                 (2) A Member of Parliament shall have the powers, privileges
               and immunities, as prescribed.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                   [No. 2 of 2016   29

  77.    (1) Subject to this Article and Article 78, the National       Procedure of
                                                                        National
Assembly shall regulate its own procedure and make Standing             Assembly
Orders for the conduct of its business.
   (2)    The proceedings of the National Assembly shall not be
invalid due to—
     (a) a vacancy in its membership; or
     (b) the presence or participation of a person not entitled to be
           present at, or to participate in, the proceedings of the
           National Assembly.
  (3) There shall preside at a sitting of the National Assembly—
     (a) the Speaker;
     (b) in the absence of the Speaker, the First Deputy Speaker;
     (c) in the absence of the First Deputy Speaker, the Second
           Deputy Speaker; or
     (d) in the absence of the Second Deputy Speaker, another
           Member of Parliament as the members may elect for
           that sitting.
  (4)    The quorum for a meeting of the National Assembly shall
be one-third of the Members of Parliament.
  78.    (1) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, a       Voting in
                                                                        National
question proposed for decision in the National Assembly shall be        Assembly
determined by a majority of the Members of Parliament present
and voting.
  (2) On a question proposed for decision in the National Assembly —
     (a) the Speaker shall have no vote; and
     (b) in the case of a tie, the question shall be lost.
  7. The Constitution is amended by the repeal of Articles 80 to        Repeal and
                                                                        replacement
90 inclusive and the substitution therefor of the following:            of Articles 80
                                                                        to 90
  30     No. 2 of 2016]           Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Committees        80.     (1) The National Assembly may establish parliamentary
of National
Assembly        committees.
                  (2)     Parliamentary committees shall be established at the first
                sitting of the National Assembly after a general election and after
                the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speakers.
                  (3)     The National Assembly shall, in selecting members of a
                parliamentary committee, ensure that there is equitable
                representation of the political parties holding seats in the National
                Assembly and independent Members of Parliament.
                  (4)     The Standing Orders shall provide for the categories,
                functions and procedures of parliamentary committees.
Term and          81.     (1) The term of Parliament shall be five years commencing
prorogation
of Parliament   from the date that the Members of Parliament are sworn into office
                after a general election and ending on the date that Parliament is
                dissolved.
                  (2)     The National Assembly may, when the Republic is at war,
                by resolution supported by a simple majority vote of the Members
                of Parliament, extend the term of Parliament for not more than
                twelve months at a time.
                  (3)     Parliament shall stand dissolved ninety days before the
                holding of the next general election.
                  (4)     Subject to clauses (5), (6) and (7), the President may
                dissolve Parliament if the Executive cannot effectively govern the
                Republic due to the failure of the National Assembly to objectively
                and reasonably carry out its legislative function.
                  (5)     Where the President intends to dissolve Parliament in
                accordance with clause (4), the President shall inform the public
                and refer the matter, within seven days, to the Constitutional Court.
                  (6)     The Constitutional Court shall hear the matter, referred to
                it in accordance with clause (5), within seven days of receipt of the
                matter.
         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016      31

  (7)    The Constitutional Court shall, where it decides that the
situation in clause (4) exists, inform the President and the President
shall dissolve Parliament.
   (8)   Where Parliament is dissolved under clauses (3) and (4),
the President shall, until the President-elect assumes office, continue
to perform the executive functions, in accordance with Article 104.
  (9)    Where Parliament is dissolved under clauses (3) and (4),
general elections shall be held within ninety days of the dissolution.
  (10)    The President may, due to a state of war, state of public
emergency or threatened state of public emergency, after the
dissolution of Parliament and before the holding of general elections,
recall the National Assembly that was dissolved.
  (11)    The President may, in consultation with the Speaker,
prorogue Parliament by proclamation.

    Speaker, Deputy Speakers and Officers of National
                       Assembly
   82. (1) The Members of Parliament shall elect, by secret ballot,       Speaker and
                                                                          Deputy
a Speaker of the National Assembly from a list of names of persons,       Speakers of
who are qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament, but are         National
                                                                          Assembly
not Members of Parliament, submitted to the National Assembly
by—
     (a) the President; and
     (b) political parties holding seats in the National Assembly.
  (2) A person is qualified to be elected as Speaker of the
National Assembly if that person—
     (a) is a citizen by birth or descent;
     (b) does not have dual citizenship;
     (c) has been ordinarily resident in Zambia;
     (d) is at least thirty-five years old;
32   No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              (e) has obtained, as a minimum academic qualification, a grade
                    twelve certificate or its equivalent;
              (f) declares that person’s assets and liabilities, as prescribed;
              (g) has paid that person’s taxes or made arrangements
                   satisfactory to the appropriate tax authority for the
                   payment of the taxes; and
              (h) is not a Member of Parliament.
            (3) There shall be two Deputy Speakers of the National
         Assembly who are not members of the same political party and of
         the same gender.
            (4) The Members of Parliament shall elect, by secret ballot,
         the First Deputy Speaker from a list of three names, selected by
         the political parties represented in the National Assembly, from
         among persons who are qualified to be elected as Members of
         Parliament but are not Members of Parliament.
            (5) The Members of Parliament shall elect, by secret ballot,
         the Second Deputy Speaker from among their number.
           (6) The Members of Parliament shall elect a Speaker and the
         Deputy Speakers—
              (a) when the National Assembly first sits after a general
                   election; and
              (b) if the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes
                    vacant.
           (7) The office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall become
         vacant if the Speaker or Deputy Speaker—
              (a) becomes disqualified under Article 70 (2);
              (b) resigns by notice, in writing, to the President;
              (c) is removed from office in accordance with Article 83; or
              (d) dies.
            (8) When the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes
         vacant, business shall not be transacted in the National Assembly,
         other than an election to the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016      33

   83. (1) A Member of Parliament, supported by at least one-           Removal of
                                                                        Speaker on
third of the Members of Parliament, may move a motion for the           specified
removal of the Speaker or a Deputy Speaker, alleging that the           grounds
Speaker or Deputy Speaker has—
     (a) violated this Constitution;
     (b) a mental or physical disability that makes the Speaker or
           Deputy Speaker incapable of performing the functions
           of the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker; or
     (c) committed gross misconduct.
  (2)   The motion shall specify the particulars of the allegation.
   (3) Where a motion is supported by a resolution of two-thirds
of the Members of Parliament, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
shall be suspended from office and the National Assembly shall
refer the matter to a parliamentary committee.
   (4) The parliamentary committee, to which the matter has been
referred in accordance with clause (3), shall, within seven days of
the reference—
     (a) investigate the matter, and the Speaker or Deputy Speaker
           has the right to appear, be heard and be represented
           before the parliamentary committee; and
     (b) report to the National Assembly whether or not the
          particulars of the allegations specified in the motion have
          been substantiated.
  (5) Where the parliamentary committee reports that the
particulars of the allegation against the Speaker or Deputy
Speaker—
     (a) are not substantiated, the National Assembly shall, on a
           motion supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds
           of the Members of Parliament, taken by secret ballot,
           resolve that the Speaker or Deputy Speaker—
             (i)   did not commit the violations specified in the
                   motion; and
             (ii) be reinstated; or
     (b) are substantiated, the National Assembly shall, on a motion
           supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the
           Members of Parliament, taken by secret ballot, resolve
           that the Speaker or Deputy Speaker has committed the
           violations specified in the motion and that the Speaker
           or Deputy Speaker cease to hold office forthwith.
   34     No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (6) Where a resolution is made, in accordance with clause (5)
               (b), an election of Speaker or Deputy Speaker shall be conducted
               within seven days of the resolution, in accordance with Article 82.
Clerk of          84. (1) There shall be a Clerk of the National Assembly who
National
Assembly       shall be appointed by the Parliamentary Service Commission, subject
               to ratification by the National Assembly.
                 (2) A person shall not be appointed Clerk of the National
               Assembly unless that person has the academic qualifications,
               experience and skills prescribed.
                 (3) Subject to clause (5), the Clerk of the National Assembly
               shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-five years.
                 (4) The Clerk of the National Assembly may retire, with full
               benefits, on attaining the age of sixty years.
                  (5) The National Assembly may, by a resolution supported by
               the votes of not less than two-thirds of the Members of Parliament,
               remove the Clerk of the National Assembly on the same grounds
               and procedure that apply to the removal of a judge.
                 (6) The Clerk of the National Assembly may resign from office
               by three months’ notice, in writing, to the Speaker.
Officers of       85. There shall be appointed such officers in the department
National
Assembly       of the Clerk of the National Assembly, as prescribed.
                              General Parliamentary Matters
Presidential     86. (1) The President shall, at least twice in every year, attend
address to     and address the National Assembly.
National
Assembly
and              (2) The President may, at any time during the term of
presidential   Parliament, send a message to the National Assembly which shall
messages
               be read by the Leader of Government Business or by a Minister
               designated by the President.
Vote of           87. (1) The National Assembly may censure a Minister or
censure
               Provincial Minister where the Members of Parliament are
               dissatisfied with the conduct or performance of the Minister or
               Provincial Minister.
                  (2) The proceedings to censure a Minister or Provincial
               Minister shall be commenced by a notice of motion, submitted to
               the Speaker, signed by at least one-third of the Members of
               Parliament, stating the grounds in support of the motion.
      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                  [No. 2 of 2016 35

   (3) The Speaker shall, on receipt of the notice of motion
submitted in accordance with clause (2), cause a copy of the notice
of motion to be given to the Minister or Provincial Minister.
   (4) The notice of motion to censure a Minister or Provincial
Minister shall not be debated until after the expiry of seven days
from the date the notice of motion is submitted to the Speaker.
   (5) The National Assembly may pass a vote of censure on a
Minister or Provincial Minister by resolution supported by two-
thirds of the votes of the Members of Parliament.
   88. (1) A citizen may petition the National Assembly to initiate     Right to
the enactment, amendment or repeal of legislation.                      petition and
                                                                        make
  (2) A citizen may comment on a deliberation, statement or             comments
decision of the National Assembly.
   (3) The manner of petitioning and commenting referred to in
this Article shall be prescribed.
   89. (1) The National Assembly shall facilitate public                Public access
involvement in the legislative process.                                 and
                                                                        participation
   (2) The National Assembly or a parliamentary committee shall
not exclude the public or media from its sittings, unless there are
justifiable reasons for the exclusion and the Speaker informs the
public or media of the reasons.
  8. The Constitution is amended by the repeal of Parts VI to           Repeal and
XIV inclusive and the substitution therefor of the following:           replacement
                                                                        of Parts VI
                                                                        to XIV
                            PART VII
                            EXECUTIVE
                      Executive Authority
   90. The Executive authority derives from the people of Zambia        Principles of
                                                                        executive
and shall be exercised in a manner compatible with the principles       authority
of social justice and for the people’s well-being and benefit.
   91. (1) There shall be a President of the Republic who shall         Presidency
be the Head of State and Government and Commander-in-Chief              and vesting
                                                                        of executive
of the Defence Force.                                                   authority

   (2) The executive authority of the State vests in the President
and, subject to this Constitution, shall be exercised directly by the
President or through public officers or other persons appointed by
the President.
   36    No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (3) The President shall, in exercise of the executive authority
               of the State—
                    (a) respect, uphold and safeguard this Constitution;
                    (b) safeguard the sovereignty of the Republic;
                    (c) promote democracy and enhance the unity of the Nation;
                    (d) respect the diversity of the different communities of
                          Zambia;
                    (e) promote and protect the rights and freedoms of a person;
                         and
                    (f)     uphold the rule of law.
Executive         92. (1) The President shall perform, with dignity, leadership
functions of
President
               and integrity, the acts that are necessary and expedient for, or
               reasonably incidental to, the exercise of the executive authority.
                  (2) Without limiting the other provisions of this Constitution,
               the President shall—
                    (a) appoint ambassadors, high commissioners, plenipotentiaries,
                          diplomatic representatives and consuls;
                    (b) receive and accredit foreign ambassadors, high
                         commissioners, plenipotentiaries, diplomatic
                         representatives, consuls and heads of international
                         organisations;
                    (c) negotiate and sign international agreements and treaties
                          and, subject to the approval of the National Assembly,
                          ratify or accede to international agreements and treaties;
                    (d) establish, merge and dissolve Government ministries,
                         subject to the approval of the National Assembly;
                    (e) appoint persons as are required by this Constitution or
                          any other law to be appointed by the President;
                    (f) appoint persons as are required to perform special duties
                          for the Executive;
                    (g) confer honours;
                    (h) sign and promulgate proclamations as specified in this
                          Constitution or as prescribed;
                    (i) initiate Bills for submission to, and consideration by, the
                           National Assembly; and
      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                    [No. 2 of 2016       37

      (j) perform other functions specified by this Constitution or
            as prescribed.
  93. (1) A decision or instruction of the President shall be in            Confirmation
writing under the President’s signature.                                    of
                                                                            presidential
                                                                            decisions
  (2) The signature of the President on an instrument shall be              and
under Public Seal.                                                          instructions

   94. (1) Where the performance of an executive function is                Approval of
                                                                            appointments
expressed by this Constitution to be subject to approval by the             and measures
National Assembly, the National Assembly shall, in the sitting next         by National
after receipt of the request for approval, give the approval within         Assembly
twenty-one days of the commencement of the sitting.
   (2) Where an approval is not given within the period specified
in clause (1) or the National Assembly unreasonably refuses to
give an approval as requested, the President shall refer the matter
to the Constitutional Court for hearing and the decision of the
Constitutional Court is final.
  (3) Where the Constitutional Court decides that the refusal or
delay by the National Assembly was justified, the President shall
comply with the order of the Court.
  (4) Where the Constitutional Court decides that the refusal or
delay by the National Assembly was unreasonable, the National
Assembly shall proceed to approve the matter.
   95. (1) Where in this Constitution an appointment to an office           Ratification
                                                                            of
or the taking of a measure by the President is subject to ratification      appointments
by the National Assembly, the National Assembly shall, in the sitting       and
next after receipt of the request for ratification, give its ratification   measures by
                                                                            National
within twenty-one days of the commencement of the sitting.                  Assembly
   (2) Where ratification is not given within the period specified
in clause (1), the President shall propose another measure or appoint
another person to that office and submit that measure or appointment
for ratification by the National Assembly.
   (3) Where the National Assembly refuses or delays the
ratification for the second time, the President shall propose another
measure or appoint another person to that office and shall submit
that measure or appointment for ratification by the National
Assembly.
   (4) Where the National Assembly refuses or delays the
ratification of the measure or appointment for the third time, that
measure or appointment shall take effect.
   38    No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Advisory           96. (1) There shall be an Advisory Committee on the
Committee       prerogative of mercy which shall consist of persons appointed by
on
prerogative     the President.
of mercy
                   (2) The Advisory Committee shall advise the President on an
                action or a decision to be taken in relation to a person convicted of
                an offence by a court or court-martial.
                   (3) A member of the Advisory Committee shall hold office at
                the pleasure of the President.
                  (4) The President may preside at a meeting of the Advisory
                Committee.
                   (5) The Advisory Committee shall determine its own procedure
                for meetings.
Prerogative       97. (1) The President may, on the advice of the Advisory
of mercy        Committee—
                     (a) conditionally or unconditionally, pardon a person convicted
                           of an offence;
                     (b) substitute a less severe form of punishment imposed on a
                          person by a court; or
                     (c) remit the whole or part of a fine, penalty or forfeiture.
                    (2) A person who is sentenced to death may request the
                President, either directly or through a representative, for a pardon
                or commutation of the sentence.
Protection of      98. (1) A person shall not institute or continue civil
President       proceedings against the President or a person performing executive
from legal
proceedings     functions, as provided in Article 109, in respect of anything done or
                omitted to be done by the President or that person in their private
                capacity during the tenure of office as President.
                  (2) The President shall not, in the President’s private capacity
                during the tenure of office as President, institute or continue civil
                proceedings against a person.
                   (3) For purposes of clauses (1) and (2), where a law limits the
                time within which proceedings may be brought against a person,
                the term of office shall not be taken into account in calculating the
                period of time.
                   (4) Subject to clause (9), the President or a person performing
                executive functions, as provided in Article 109, is immune from
                criminal proceedings which immunity continues after that person
                ceases to hold or perform the functions of that office.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016   39

   (5) Where there is prima facie evidence that a person who
held the office of President or who performed executive functions
committed an offence whilst in office or during the period that
person performed executive functions, the President shall submit a
report, outlining the grounds relating to the offence allegedly
committed, to the National Assembly, requesting the National
Assembly to remove the immunity from criminal proceedings of
that person.
   (6) Where the National Assembly receives a report, submitted
in accordance with clause (5), the National Assembly shall constitute
a select committee to scrutinise the grounds submitted and determine
whether or not there is a prima facie case, based on the grounds
submitted, that warrants the removal of the immunity from criminal
proceedings, and recommend its decision to the National Assembly.
  (7) The person who held the office of President or who performed
executive functions has the right to appear, be represented and be
heard before the select committee constituted under clause (6).
   (8) Where the select committee, constituted under clause (6),
recommends the removal of immunity from criminal proceedings
from the person who held the office of President or who performed
executive functions, the National Assembly may remove the
immunity in respect of the alleged offence, by a resolution supported
by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the Members of Parliament.
   (9) Where immunity is removed, in accordance with clause (8),
the person who held the office of President or who performed
executive functions, shall be charged with the offence for which
the immunity from criminal proceedings was removed.
  (10) Where a court acquits the person who held the office of
President or who performed executive functions, of an offence for
which that person’s immunity from criminal proceedings was
removed, the immunity of that person shall, for all purposes, be
deemed not to have been removed, without further proceedings.
  (11) The process for the removal of immunity, provided for
under this Article, shall not apply to an impeachable offence under
Article108.
   40     No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                                       Election of President
Returning          99. The Chairperson of the Electoral Commission shall be the
officer for
presidential     Returning Officer in an election to the office of President.
elections

Qualifications      100. (1) A person qualifies to be nominated as a candidate
and
disqualifica-    for election as President if that person—
tions for             (a) is a citizen by birth or descent;
nomination
as                    (b) has been ordinarily resident in Zambia;
presidential
candidate             (c) is at least thirty-five years old;
                      (d) is a registered voter;
                      (e) has obtained, as a minimum academic qualification, a grade
                            twelve certificate or its equivalent;
                      (f) is fluent in the official language;
                      (g) has paid that person’s taxes or has made arrangements,
                           satisfactory to the appropriate tax authority, for the
                           payment of the taxes;
                      (h) declares that person’s assets and liabilities, as prescribed;
                      (i) pays the prescribed election fee on, or before, the date
                            fixed for the delivery of nomination papers; and
                      (j) is supported by at least one hundred registered voters from
                              each Province.
                    (2) A person is disqualified from being nominated as a
                 candidate for election as President if that person—
                      (a) is a public officer;
                      (b) has dual citizenship;
                      (c) is holding or acting in a Constitutional office or other
                           public office;
                      (d) is a judge or judicial officer;
                      (e) was removed from public office on grounds of gross
                           misconduct in the immediate preceding five years;
                      (f) has a mental or physical disability that would make the
                            person incapable of performing the executive functions;
                      (g) is an undischarged bankrupt;
                      (h) is serving a sentence of imprisonment; or
                      (i) has, in the immediate preceding five years, served a term
                            of imprisonment of at least three years.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                   [No. 2 of 2016        41

  101. (1) A President shall be elected by registered voters in             Election of
accordance with Article 47 (1) and this Article.                            President

  (2) The Returning Officer shall declare the presidential
candidate who receives more than fifty percent of the valid votes
cast during the election as President-elect.
   (3) If at the initial ballot a presidential candidate does not receive
more than fifty percent of the valid votes cast, a second ballot shall
be held within thirty-seven days of the initial ballot, where the only
candidates shall be the presidential candidates who obtained—
      (a) the highest and second highest number of valid votes cast
            in the initial ballot; or
      (b) an equal number of the valid votes cast in the initial
           ballot, being the highest votes amongst the presidential
           candidates that stood for election to the office of
           President.
   (4) A person may within seven days of the declaration made
under clause (2), petition the Constitutional Court to nullify the
election of a presidential candidate who took part in the initial ballot
on the ground that—
      (a) the person was not validly elected; or
      (b) a provision of this Constitution or other law relating to
            presidential elections was not complied with.
   (5) The Constitutional Court shall hear an election petition filed
in accordance with clause (4) within fourteen days of the filing of
the petition.
   (6) The Constitutional Court may, after hearing an election
petition—
      (a) declare the election of the presidential candidate valid;
      (b) nullify the election of the presidential candidate; or
      (c) disqualify the presidential candidate from being a candidate
            in the second ballot.
   (7) A decision of the Constitutional Court made in accordance
with clause (6) is final.
   (8) The presidential candidate who obtains the majority of the
valid votes cast in the second ballot shall be declared President-
elect.
   42      No. 2 of 2016] Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Disqualifi-      102.    (1) If a presidential candidate—
cation for
run-off              (a) resigns for a reason other than health;
                     (b) becomes disqualified as specified in Article 100; or
                     (c) is disqualified by a decision of the Constitutional Court in
                            accordance with Article 101;
               the presidential candidate shall not take part in the second ballot
               and the candidate who scored the third highest number of valid
               votes cast in the initial ballot shall be a presidential candidate in the
               second ballot, together with the remaining presidential candidate
               that had initially qualified for the second ballot.
                 (2) If a presidential candidate—
                     (a) dies; or
                     (b) resigns due to ill-health;
               before the taking of a second ballot, the running mate to that
               presidential candidate in the initial ballot shall assume the place of
               that presidential candidate.
                 (3) The presidential candidate who assumed the place of the
               previous presidential candidate in accordance with clause (2) shall
               appoint a running mate.
                 (4) Where both presidential candidates—
                    (a) resign;
                    (b) become disqualified under Article 100;
                    (c) become disqualified by a decision of the Constitutional
                          Court under Article 101; or
                    (d) die;
               before the taking of the second ballot, fresh nominations shall be
               filed with the Electoral Commission, as prescribed.
Election          103. (1) A person may, within seven days of the declaration
petition
               of a President-elect, petition the Constitutional Court to nullify the
               election of the President-elect on the ground that—
                     (a) the person was not validly elected; or
                     (b) a provision of this Constitution or other law relating to
                           presidential elections was not complied with.
                  (2) The Constitutional Court shall hear an election petition
               relating to the President-elect within fourteen days of the filing of
               the petition.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                  [No. 2 of 2016       43

  (3) The Constitutional Court may, after hearing an election
petition—
     (a) declare the election of the President-elect valid; or
     (b) nullify the election of the President-elect and Vice-
          President-elect.
   (4) A decision of the Constitutional Court under clause (3) is
final.
   (5) Where the election of the President-elect and Vice-
President-elect is nullified by the Constitutional Court, a presidential
election shall be held within thirty days from the date of the
nullification.
  104. (1) The President-elect shall be sworn into office and              Transition
assume office in accordance with Article 105.                              period
                                                                           before
   (2) Subject to clauses (3) and (4), where the Returning Officer         assuming
                                                                           office
declares a presidential candidate as President-elect, the incumbent
shall continue to perform the executive functions until the President-
elect assumes office, except the power to—
      (a) make an appointment; or
      (b) dissolve the National Assembly.
   (3) Where an election petition is filed against the incumbent,
under Article 103 (1), or an election is nullified, under Article 103(3)
(b), the Speaker shall perform the executive functions, except the
power to—
     (a) make an appointment; or
     (b) dissolve the National Assembly.
   (4) Subject to Article 105 and except where the incumbent is
the President-elect, the incumbent President shall, on the assumption
of office by the President-elect, begin and complete the procedural
and administrative handing over of the executive functions, to the
President-elect, within fourteen days from the day the President-
elect assumes office.
    Assumption of Office, Tenure of Office and Vacancy
  105. (1) The President-elect shall assume office after being             Assumption
sworn in by the Chief Justice or, in the absence of the Chief Justice,     of office
the Deputy Chief Justice.
   (2) The President-elect shall be sworn into office on the Tuesday
following—
44   No. 2 of 2016]      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              (a) the seventh day after the date of the declaration of the
                    presidential election results, if no petition has been filed
                    in accordance with Article 103; or
              (b) the seventh day after the date on which the Constitutional
                    Court declares the election to be valid.
            (3) Subject to clause (4), where the President-elect dies, resigns
         or is for a reason unable to assume office, the Vice-President-
         elect shall be sworn into, and assume the office of President, in
         accordance with clause (1).
            (4) Subject to clause (5), where the inability of the President-
         elect to assume office is as a result of an event or circumstance
         beyond the control of the President-elect, the Vice-President-elect
         shall not be sworn into office.
           (5) A political party whose presidential candidate was declared
         President-elect or another person shall, within three days from the
         date on which the President-elect should have been sworn into
         office, petition the Constitutional Court to determine whether or
         not the inability of the President-elect to assume office is permanent.
           (6) Where the Constitutional Court decides that the inability of
         the President-elect to assume office is permanent, the Vice-
         President-elect shall be sworn into office as President and assume
         office in accordance with clause (1).
            (7) The Vice-President-elect who assumes office as President,
         in accordance with clause (3) or (6), shall appoint a person as
         Vice-President, subject to approval by the National Assembly,
         signified by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the Members of
         Parliament.
            (8) Where the Vice-President elect who is supposed to assume
         the office of President as specified in clause (3) or (6) dies, resigns
         or is for another reason unable to assume the office of President—
                (a) the Speaker shall perform the executive functions; and
                (b) a presidential election shall be held within sixty days of
                      the occurrence of the vacancy.
           (9) The Speaker shall, perform the executive functions assumed
         in accordance with clause (8) except the power to make an
         appointment or dissolve the National Assembly.
           (10) The Speaker shall, when the President-elect assumes
         office, complete the procedural and administrative handing over
         process within thirty days.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016      45

   106. (1) The term of office for a President is five years which        Tenure of
shall run concurrently with the term of Parliament, except that the       office of
                                                                          President
term of office of President shall expire when the President-elect         and vacancy
assumes office in accordance with Article 105.
   (2) A President shall hold office from the date the President-
elect is sworn into office and ending on the date the next President-
elect is sworn into office.
   (3) A person who has twice held office as President is not
eligible for election as President.
  (4) The office of President becomes vacant if the President—
     (a) dies;
     (b) resigns by notice in writing to the Speaker of the National
           Assembly; or
     (c) otherwise ceases to hold office under Article 81,107 or
           108.
  (5) When a vacancy occurs in the office of President, except
under Article 81—
     (a) the Vice-President shall immediately assume the office
            of President; or
     (b) if the Vice-President is unable for a reason to assume the
            office of President, the Speaker shall perform the
            executive functions, except the power to—
               (i) make an appointment; or
               (ii) dissolve the National Assembly;
            and a presidential election shall be held within sixty days
            after the occurrence of the vacancy.
   (6) If the Vice-President assumes the office of President, in
accordance with clause (5)(a), or a person is elected to the office
of President as a result of an election held in accordance with
clause 5(b), the Vice-President or the President-elect shall serve
for the unexpired term of office and be deemed, for the purposes
of clause (3)—
     (a) to have served a full term as President if, at the date on
           which the President assumed office, at least three years
           remain before the date of the next general election; or
     (b) not to have served a term of office as President if, at the
           date on which the President assumed office, less than
           three years remain before the date of the next general
           election.
   46    No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Removal of        107. (1) A Member of Parliament, supported by at least one-
President on
grounds of     third of the Members of Parliament, may move a motion for the
incapacity     investigation of the physical or mental capacity of the President to
               perform executive functions.
                 (2) The motion moved in accordance with clause (1) shall
               specify the particulars of the allegation.
                 (3) Where the motion is supported in the National Assembly
               by a resolution of two-thirds of the Members of Parliament—
                    (a) the Speaker shall, within forty-eight hours of the adoption
                          of the resolution, inform the Chief Justice of the
                          resolution; and
                    (b) the Chief Justice shall immediately inform the President
                          of the resolution, whereupon the President shall cease
                          to perform the executive functions and the Vice-
                          President shall perform the executive functions, except
                          the power to—
                             (i) make an appointment; or
                             (ii) dissolve the National Assembly.
                  (4) The Chief Justice shall, within seven days of being informed
               of the resolution of the National Assembly, constitute a medical
               board, in consultation with the body responsible for regulating health
               practitioners, to inquire into the physical or mental capacity of the
               President.
                 (5) A medical board shall consist of not less than three persons
               selected from among persons who are registered as health
               practitioners.
                  (6) A medical board, constituted under clause (5), shall examine
               the President and report to the Chief Justice, within fourteen days
               of the constitution of the medical board, whether or not the President
               is capable of performing the executive functions.
                 (7) Where the medical board reports that the President is
               capable of performing the executive functions, the Chief Justice
               shall, within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the medical report,
               cause a copy of the report to be presented to the National Assembly
               which shall resolve that the President should resume performing
               the executive functions.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)(                [No. 2 of 2016      47

  (8) Where the medical board reports that the President is not
capable of performing the executive functions, the Chief Justice
shall, within forty-eight hours of the receipt of the medical report,
cause a copy of the report to be presented to the National Assembly
which shall resolve that the President should cease to hold office
and the Vice-President shall assume the office of President in
accordance with Article 106 (5).
  (9) This Article applies to the Vice-President.
   108. (1) A Member of Parliament, supported by at least one-           Impeachment
                                                                         of President
third of the Members of Parliament, may move a motion for the
impeachment of the President alleging that the President has
committed—
     (a) a violation of a provision of this Constitution or other law;
     (b) a crime under international law; or
     (c) gross misconduct.
  (2) The motion, moved in accordance with clause (1), shall
specify the particulars of the allegation.
   (3) Where a motion, moved in accordance with clause (1), is
supported, in the National Assembly, by a resolution of two-thirds
of the Members of Parliament—
      (a) the Speaker shall, within forty-eight hours of the adoption
            of the resolution, inform the Chief Justice of the
            resolution; and
      (b) the Chief Justice shall immediately inform the President
            of the resolution, whereupon the President shall cease
            to perform the executive functions and the Vice-
            President shall perform the executive functions, except
            the power to—
               (i) make an appointment; or
               (ii) dissolve the National Assembly.
   (4) The Chief Justice shall, within seven days of being informed
of the resolution of the National Assembly, appoint a tribunal, in
consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, which shall
consist of a chairperson and not less than two other members from
among persons who hold, have held or qualify to hold, the office of
judge.
  (5) The tribunal appointed under clause (4) shall, within thirty
days of its appointment—
48   No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              (a) investigate the matter relating to the impeachment of the
                    President; and
              (b) report to the Chief Justice as to whether or not the
                   particulars of the allegations specified in the motion have
                   been substantiated.
           (6) The President has the right to appear and be represented
         before the tribunal during its investigation.
            (7) The Chief Justice shall, on receipt of the report referred to
         in clause (5) (b), immediately submit the report to the National
         Assembly.
            (8) Where the tribunal reports that the particulars of an
         allegation against the President—
              (a) is not substantiated, the National Assembly shall, on a
                    motion supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds
                    of the Members of Parliament, taken by secret ballot,
                    resolve that—
                       (i) the President did not commit the violations
                             specified in the motion; and
                       (ii) further proceedings shall not be taken with respect
                              to the allegation; or
              (b) is substantiated, the National Assembly shall, on a motion
                     supported by the votes of not less than two-thirds of the
                     Members of Parliament, taken by secret ballot, resolve
                     that the President has committed the violations specified
                     in the motion and that the President should cease to
                     hold office forthwith.
           (9) The President shall, on the passing of a resolution in
         accordance with—
              (a) clause (7) (a), resume to perform the executive functions;
                    or
              (b) clause (7) (b), cease to hold office and be amenable to
                    prosecution without the need to lift the immunity under
                    Article 98.
           (10) Where a motion is moved in accordance with clause (1),
         the President shall not dissolve Parliament.
           (11)   This Article applies to the Vice-President.
          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016 49

   109. (1) If the President leaves Zambia or is absent from               Performance
                                                                           of executive
office, the Vice-President shall perform the executive functions           functions
specified, in writing, by the President until the President returns to     during
                                                                           absence of
office or revokes the authority.                                           President
  (2) Where the Vice-President is incapable of performing the
executive functions, as specified under clause (1), the President
shall appoint a member of the Cabinet to perform the executive
functions until the—
     (a) Vice-President is able to perform those functions;
     (b) President returns to office; or
     (c) President revokes the authority.
   (3) Where the President is unable to appoint a member of
Cabinet to perform the executive functions, in accordance with
clause (2), Cabinet may elect one of its members to perform the
executive functions until the—
     (a) Vice-President is able to perform those functions;
     (b) President returns to office; or
     (c) President revokes the authority.
                          Vice-President
   110. (1) There shall be a Vice-President for the Republic who           Vice-
                                                                           President,
shall be the running mate to a presidential candidate in a presidential    election to
election.                                                                  office and
                                                                           swearing in
  (2) The qualifications and disqualifications applying to a
presidential candidate apply to the person selected by the presidential
candidate to be the running mate.
  (3) An election to the office of Vice-President shall be
conducted at the same time as that of an election to the office of
President so that a vote cast for a presidential candidate is a vote
cast for the running mate, and if the presidential candidate is elected,
the running mate shall be considered to have been elected.
  (4) A Vice-President-elect shall be sworn into office by the
Chief Justice or, in the absence of the Chief Justice, the Deputy
Chief Justice.
  (5) The Vice-President shall assume office on the same day
that the President assumes office.
   50    No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Tenure of        111.   (1) The term of office for a Vice-President is five years.
office of
Vice-            (2) A Vice-President shall hold office from the date the Vice-
President
and vacancy    President-elect is sworn into office and ending on the date the next
               President-elect is sworn into office.
                 (3) A person who has twice held the office of Vice-President
               shall not be selected as a running mate.
                 (4) The office of Vice-President becomes vacant if the Vice-
               President—
                    (a) dies;
                    (b) resigns by notice in writing to the President;
                    (c) otherwise ceases to hold office under Article 81,107 or
                          108; or
                    (d) assumes the office of President.
                  (5) Where a vacancy occurs in the office of Vice-President,
               except as provided under Article 81, the President shall appoint
               another person to be Vice-President and the National Assembly
               shall, by a resolution supported by the votes of not less than two-
               thirds of the Members of Parliament, approve the appointment of
               that person as Vice-President.
                 (6) The person who assumes office as Vice-President, in
               accordance with clause (5), shall serve for the unexpired term of
               office and be deemed for the purposes of clause (3)—
                    (a) to have served a full term as Vice-President if, at the date
                          on which the Vice-President assumed office, more than
                          three years remain before the date of the next general
                          election; or
                    (b) not to have served a term of office as Vice-President if,
                         at the date on which the Vice-President assumed office,
                         less than three years remain before the date of the next
                         general elections.
Functions of     112. (1) The Vice-President shall be answerable to the
Vice-
President      President in the performance of the functions of Vice-President.
                 (2) The Vice-President shall—
                    (a) perform the functions that are assigned to the Vice-
                         President by the President;
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016        51

     (b) perform the executive functions during the periods
          specified in this Constitution; and
     (c) assume the office of President as specified in Article 106
           (5).
                      Cabinet Ministers
  113. There shall be a Cabinet consisting of the—                       Cabinet
    (a) President;
    (b) Vice-President;
    (c) Ministers; and
    (d) Attorney-General, as ex-officio member.
  114. (1) The functions of Cabinet are as follows:                      Functions of
                                                                         Cabinet
     (a) approve and cause to be implemented Government policy;
     (b) approve Government Bills for introduction to the National
           Assembly;
     (c) approve and cause the national budget to be presented to
           the National Assembly;
     (d) recommend the accession and ratification of international
           agreements and treaties to the National Assembly;
     (e) recommend, for approval of the National Assembly—
             (i) loans to be contracted by the State; and
             (ii) guarantees on loans contracted by State institutions
                    or other institutions; and
     (f) advise the President on matters relating to the performance
           of executive functions.
  (2) Cabinet shall take collective responsibility for Cabinet
decisions.
  115. (1) Subject to this Article, Cabinet shall regulate its own       Proceedings
procedure.                                                               of Cabinet
                                                                         meetings
   (2) Cabinet shall meet at least once in every month to perform
its functions as specified in Article 114.
  (3) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall, in consultation with the
President, call for meetings of Cabinet.
  (4) There shall preside at meetings of Cabinet—
     (a) the President;
     (b) in the absence of the President, the Vice-President; or
   52    No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (c) in the absence of the Vice-President, a member of Cabinet
                         appointed by the President.
               (5) Where the President is unable to appoint a member of
             Cabinet to preside at a meeting of Cabinet, the members of Cabinet
             present at the meeting may elect one of the members to preside.
               (6) The President may, in consultation with the Secretary to
             the Cabinet, invite a person whose presence is desirable to attend
             and participate in the deliberations of a meeting of Cabinet but that
             person shall have no vote.
Ministers       116. (1) The President shall appoint a prescribed number
             of Members of Parliament as Ministers.
               (2) A Minister shall be responsible, under the direction of the
             President, for the policy and strategic direction of a Ministry,
             department or other State institution, as assigned by the President.
               (3) The office of Minister becomes vacant if—
                  (a) the Minister is removed from office by the President;
                  (b) the Minister resigns, by notice in writing to the President;
                  (c) in the case of a nominated Member of Parliament, the
                        nomination is revoked;
                  (d) the Minister dies;
                  (e) another person assumes the office of President; or
                  (f) the Minister has a mental or physical disability that makes
                         the Minister incapable of performing the functions of
                         that office.
Provincial     117. (1) The President shall appoint a Provincial Minister for
Minister     each Province from among Members of Parliament.
               (2) The office of Provincial Minister becomes vacant if—
                  (a) the Provincial Minister is removed from office by the
                        President;
                  (b) the Provincial Minister resigns, by notice in writing to the
                        President;
                  (c) the Provincial Minister dies;
                  (d) another person assumes the office of President;
                  (e) the Provincial Minister has a mental or physical disability
                        that makes the Provincial Minister incapable of
                        performing the functions of that office; or
          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016        53

        (f) in the case of a nominated Member of Parliament, the
              nomination is revoked.
  (3)     A Provincial Minister shall—
        (a) be the head of Government in the Province;
        (b) ensure that national policies are implemented in all districts
              in the Province; and
        (c) ensure that the concurrent functions of the Province and
              the exclusive functions of the local authorities are
              performed in accordance with this Constitution and other
              laws.
                               PART VIII
                                 JUDICIARY
  Judicial Authority, System of Courts and Independence
  118. (1) The judicial authority of the Republic derives from               Principles of
the people of Zambia and shall be exercised in a just manner and             judicial
                                                                             authority
such exercise shall promote accountability.
  (2) In exercising judicial authority, the courts shall be guided
by the following principles:
        (a) justice shall be done to all, without discrimination;
        (b) justice shall not be delayed;
        (c) adequate compensation shall be awarded, where payable;
        (d) alternative forms of dispute resolution, including traditional
               dispute resolution mechanisms, shall be promoted,
               subject to clause (3);
        (e) justice shall be administered without undue regard to
              procedural technicalities; and
        (f) the values and principles of this Constitution shall be
              protected and promoted.
  (3)     Traditional dispute resolution mechanisms shall not—
        (a) contravene the Bill of Rights;
        (b) be inconsistent with other provisions of this Constitution
              or other written law; or
        (c) be repugnant to justice and morality.
  119. (1) Judicial authority vests in the courts and shall be               Vesting of
exercised by the courts in accordance with this Constitution and             judicial
                                                                             authority
other laws.                                                                  and
                                                                             performance
  (2)     The courts shall perform the following judicial functions:         of judicial
                                                                             function
   54     No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                      (a) hear civil and criminal matters; and
                      (b) hear matters relating to, and in respect of, this Constitution.
                   (3) Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, other
                 law or as ordered by a court, the proceedings of a court shall be in
                 public.
System of           120. (1) The Judiciary shall consist of the superior courts and
court            the following courts:
                      (a) subordinate courts;
                      (b) small claims courts;
                      (c) local courts; and
                      (d) courts, as prescribed.
                   (2) The courts shall be courts of record, except that local
                 courts shall progressively become courts of record.
                   (3) The following matters shall be prescribed:
                      (a) processes and procedures of the courts;
                      (b) jurisdiction, powers and sittings, of the Industrial Relations
                            Court, Commercial Court, Family Court, Children’s Court
                            and other specialised courts;
                      (c) classification and divisions of the subordinate courts;
                      (d) classification and divisions of the local courts;
                      (e) jurisdiction and composition of subordinate courts, small
                            claims courts, local courts and other prescribed courts;
                            and
                      (f) grading of judicial officers and staff of subordinate courts,
                            local courts and other prescribed courts.
                    (4) The courts, except the Supreme Court and the Constitutional
                 Court, shall be devolved to the Province and progressively to
                 districts.
                   (5) Superior courts shall sit as circuit courts in districts, in
                 accordance with a circuit schedule issued by the Chief Justice.
Ranking of         121. The Supreme Court and Constitutional Court rank
Supreme and      equivalently.
Constitutional
Courts
Functional         122. (1) In the exercise of the judicial authority, the Judiciary
independence     shall be subject only to this Constitution and the law and not be
of Judiciary
                 subject to the control or direction of a person or an authority.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016       55

   (2) A person and a person holding a public office shall not
interfere with the performance of a judicial function by a judge or
judicial officer.
  (3) The Judiciary shall not, in the performance of its
administrative functions and management of its financial affairs,
be subject to the control or direction of a person or an authority.
  (4) A person and a person holding a public office shall protect
the independence, dignity and effectiveness of the Judiciary.
  (5) The office of a judge or judicial officer shall not be abolished
while there is a substantive holder of the office.
  123. (1) The Judiciary shall be a self-accounting institution          Financial
and shall deal directly with the Ministry responsible for finance in     independence
                                                                         of Judiciary
matters relating to its finances.
   (2) The Judiciary shall be adequately funded in a financial year
to enable it effectively carry out its functions.

Establishment, Jurisdiction and sittings of Superior Courts
  124. There is established the Supreme Court which consists             Establishment
                                                                         and
of—                                                                      composition
                                                                         of Supreme
     (a) the Chief Justice;                                              Court

     (b) the Deputy Chief Justice; and
     (c) eleven other judges or a higher number of judges, as
           prescribed.
  125. (1) Subject to Article 128, the Supreme Court is the final        Jurisdiction
                                                                         of Supreme
court of appeal.                                                         Court
  (2) The Supreme Court has—
     (a) appellate jurisdiction to hear appeals from the Court of
           Appeal; and
     (b) jurisdiction conferred on it by other laws.
   (3) The Supreme Court is bound by its decisions, except in the
interest of justice and development of jurisprudence.
   126. (1) The Supreme Court shall be constituted by an uneven          Sittings of
                                                                         Supreme
number of not less than three judges, except when hearing an             Court
interlocutory matter.
  (2) The Supreme Court shall be constituted by one judge when
hearing an interlocutory matter.
   56     No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                   (3) The full bench of the Supreme Court shall be constituted
                 by an uneven number of not less than five judges.
                   (4) The Supreme Court shall be presided over by—
                      (a) the Chief Justice;
                      (b) in the absence of the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief
                            Justice; and
                      (c) in the absence of the Deputy Chief Justice, the most senior
                             judge of the Supreme Court, as constituted.
Establishment      127. There is established the Constitutional Court which
and
composition      consists of—
of
Constitutional        (a) the President of the Constitutional Court;
Court
                      (b) the Deputy President of the Constitutional Court; and
                      (c) eleven other judges or a higher number of judges, as
                            prescribed.
Jurisdiction        128. (1) Subject to Article 28, the Constitutional Court has
of
Constitutional   original and final jurisdiction to hear—
Court
                      (a) a matter relating to the interpretation of this Constitution;
                      (b) a matter relating to a violation or contravention of this
                            Constitution;
                      (c) a matter relating to the President, Vice-President or an
                            election of a President;
                      (d) appeals relating to election of Members of Parliament
                           and councillors; and
                      (e) whether or not a matter falls within the jurisdiction of the
                           Constitutional Court.
                   (2) Subject to Article 28 (2), where a question relating to this
                 Constitution arises in a court, the person presiding in that court
                 shall refer the question to the Constitutional Court.
                   (3) Subject to Article 28, a person who alleges that—
                      (a) an Act of Parliament or statutory instrument;
                      (b) an action, measure or decision taken under law; or
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016 57

     (c) an act, omission, measure or decision by a person or an
           authority;
contravenes this Constitution, may petition the Constitutional Court
for redress.
  (4) A decision of the Constitutional Court is not appealable to
the Supreme Court.
  129. (1) The Constitutional Court shall be constituted by an          Sittings of
uneven number of not less than three judges, except when hearing        Constitutional
                                                                        Court
an interlocutory matter.
  (2) The Constitutional Court shall be constituted by one judge
when hearing an interlocutory matter.
  (3) The full bench of the Constitutional Court shall be constituted
by an uneven number of not less than five judges.
  (4) The Constitutional Court shall be presided over by—
     (a) the President of the Constitutional Court;
     (b) in the absence of the President of the Constitutional Court,
           the Deputy-President of the Constitutional Court; and
     (c) in the absence of the Deputy-President of the Constitutional
            Court, the most senior judge of the Constitutional Court,
            as constituted.
   130. There is established the Court of Appeal which consists         Establishment
                                                                        and
of such number of judges as prescribed.                                 composition
                                                                        of Court of
                                                                        Appeal
   131. (1) The Court of Appeal has jurisdiction to hear appeals        Jurisdiction
                                                                        of Court of
from—                                                                   Appeal
     (a) the High Court;
     (b) other courts, except for matters under the exclusive
          jurisdiction of the Constitutional Court; and
     (c) quasi-judicial bodies, except a local government elections
           tribunal.
 (2) An appeal from a decision of the Court of Appeal shall be
made to the Supreme Court with leave of the Court of Appeal.
   132. (1) The Court of Appeal shall be constituted by an uneven       Sittings of
                                                                        Court of
number of not less than three judges, except when hearing an appeal     Appeal
in an interlocutory matter.
   58    No. 2 of 2016]           Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (2) The Court of Appeal shall be constituted by one judge when
                hearing an interlocutory matter.
Establishment     133.   (1) There is established the High Court which consists
and             of—
composition
of High              (a) the Chief Justice, as an ex-officio judge; and
Court
                     (b) such number of judges as prescribed.
                  (2) There are established, as divisions of the High Court, the
                Industrial Relations Court, Commercial Court, Family Court and
                Children’s Court.
                  (3) The Chief Justice may constitute, by statutory instrument,
                specialised courts of the High Court to hear specific matters.
                  (4) The composition of courts specified in clauses (2) and (3)
                shall be prescribed.
Jurisdiction      134.   The High Court has, subject to Article 128—
of High
Court                (a) unlimited and original jurisdiction in civil and criminal
                          matters;
                     (b) appellate and supervisory jurisdiction, as prescribed; and
                     (c) jurisdiction to review decisions, as prescribed.
Sittings of       135. The High Court shall be constituted by one judge or such
High Court
                other number of judges as the Chief Justice may determine.

                               Chief Justice and other Judges
Chief Justice     136. (1) There shall be a Chief Justice who is the head of the
                Judiciary.
                  (2) The Chief Justice shall—
                     (a) be responsible for the administration of the Judiciary;
                     (b) ensure that a judge and judicial officer perform the judicial
                           function with dignity, propriety and integrity;
                     (c) establish procedures to ensure that a judge and judicial
                           officer independently exercise judicial authority in
                           accordance with the law;
                     (d) ensure that a judge and judicial officer perform the judicial
                           function without fear, favour or bias; and
                     (e) make rules and give directions necessary for the efficient
                          and effective administration of the Judiciary.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016       59

  137. (1) There shall be a Deputy Chief Justice who shall—             Deputy
                                                                        Chief Justice
     (a) perform the functions of the Chief Justice, when the Chief
           Justice is absent or there is a vacancy in the office of
           Chief Justice;
     (b) assist the Chief Justice in the administration of the
          Judiciary; and
     (c) perform the functions assigned by the Chief Justice.
   (2) The President shall, in consultation with the Judicial Service
Commission, designate a judge of the Supreme Court to perform
the functions of the Deputy Chief Justice where—
     (a) the office of the Deputy Chief Justice is vacant;
     (b) the Deputy Chief Justice is acting as Chief Justice; or
     (c) the Deputy Chief Justice is for a reason unable to perform
           the functions of that office.
  138. (1) There shall be a President of the Constitutional Court       President of
who is the head of the Constitutional Court.                            Constitutional
                                                                        Court
   (2) The President of the Constitutional Court shall be
responsible for the administration of the Constitutional Court under
the direction of the Chief Justice.
  139. (1) There shall be a Deputy President of the Constitutional      Deputy
                                                                        President of
Court who shall—                                                        Constitutional
                                                                        Court
     (a) perform the functions of the President of the Constitutional
           Court, when the President of the Constitutional Court is
           absent or there is a vacancy in the office of President
           of the Constitutional Court;
     (b) assist the President of the Constitutional Court in the
          administration of the Constitutional Court; and
     (c) perform the functions assigned by the President of the
           Constitutional Court.
   (2) The President shall, in consultation with the Judicial Service
Commission, designate a judge of the Constitutional Court to perform
the functions of the Deputy President of the Constitutional Court
where—
     (a) the office of the Deputy President of the Constitutional
           Court is vacant;
   60       No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                     (b) the Deputy President of the Constitutional Court is acting
                           as President of the Constitutional Court; or
                     (c) the Deputy President of the Constitutional Court is for a
                           reason unable to perform the functions of that office.
Appointment       140. The President shall, on the recommendation of the Judicial
of judges
                Service Commission and subject to ratification by the National
                Assembly, appoint the—
                     (a) Chief Justice;
                     (b) Deputy Chief Justice;
                     (c) President of the Constitutional Court;
                     (d) Deputy President of the Constitutional Court; and
                     (e) other judges.
Qualification      141. (1) A person qualifies for appointment as a judge if that
for
appointment     person is of proven integrity and has been a legal practitioner, in
as judge        the case of the—
                     (a) Supreme Court, for at least fifteen years;
                     (b) Constitutional Court, for at least fifteen years and has
                          specialised training or experience in human rights or
                          constitutional law;
                     (c) Court of Appeal, for at least twelve years; or
                     (d) High Court, for at least ten years.
                   (2) A person appointed as judge to a specialised court shall have
                the relevant expertise, as prescribed.
Tenure of          142. (1) A judge shall retire from office on attaining the age
office of
judge           of seventy years.
                   (2) A judge may retire, with full benefits, on attaining the age of
                sixty-five years.
                  (3) The Chief Justice and President of the Constitutional Court
                shall hold office for not more than ten years and may, thereafter,
                continue as a judge of the Supreme Court or Constitutional Court,
                subject to clause (1).
                   (4) A judge who has retired is not eligible for appointment as a
                judge.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016 61

  (5) A judge may resign from the office of judge by notice, in
writing, to the President.
   (6) Where a judge is appointed or assigned to an office, which
is not an office in the judiciary and that judge wishes to take up the
appointment, the judge shall resign from the office of judge.
   143. A judge shall be removed from office on the following            Removal of
                                                                         judge from
grounds:                                                                 office
     (a) a mental or physical disability that makes the judge
          incapable of performing judicial functions;
     (b) incompetence;
     (c) gross misconduct; or
     (d) bankruptcy.
  144. (1) The removal of a judge may be initiated by the Judicial       Procedure
                                                                         for removal
Complaints Commission or by a complaint made to the Judicial             of judge
Complaints Commission, based on the grounds specified in Article
143.
   (2) The Judicial Complaints Commission shall, where it decides
that a prima facie case has been established against a judge,
submit a report to the President.
   (3) The President shall, within seven days from the date of
receiving the report, submitted in accordance with clause (2),
suspend the judge from office and inform the Judicial Complaints
Commission of the suspension.
   (4) The Judicial Complaints Commission shall, within thirty days
of the judge being suspended from office, in accordance with clause
(3)—
     (a) hear the matter against the judge on the grounds specified
           in Article 143 (b), (c) and (d); or
     (b) constitute a medical board, in consultation with the body
           responsible for regulating health practitioners, to inquire
           into the matter against the judge based on the ground
           specified in Article 143(a).
62   No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

            (5) Where the Judicial Complaints Commission decides that an
         allegation based on a ground specified in Article 143(b), (c) and
         (d) is—
              (a) not substantiated, the Judicial Complaints Commission shall
                    recommend, to the President, the revocation of the
                    judge’s suspension and the President shall immediately
                    revoke the suspension; or
              (b) substantiated, the Judicial Complaints Commission shall
                    recommend, to the President, the removal of the judge
                    from office and the President shall immediately remove
                    the judge from office.
            (6) The proceedings under clause (4) (a) shall be held in camera
         and the judge is entitled to appear, be heard and be represented by
         a legal practitioner or other person chosen by the judge.
            (7) The medical board, constituted in accordance with clause
         (4) (b), shall consist of not less than three registered health
         practitioners.
           (8) The medical board shall, within thirty days of being
         constituted, examine the judge and report to the Judicial Complaints
         Commission on the judge’s capacity to perform the judicial functions.
           (9) Where the medical board recommends to the Judicial
         Complaints Commission that the judge is—
              (a) physically or mentally capable of performing the judicial
                    functions, the Judicial Complaints Commission shall
                    recommend to the President the revocation of the judge’s
                    suspension and the President shall immediately revoke
                    the suspension; or
              (b) not physically or mentally capable of performing the judicial
                    functions, the Judicial Complaints Commission shall
                    recommend to the President the removal of the judge
                    from office and the President shall immediately remove
                    the judge from office.
            (10) A judge who refuses to submit to an examination, in
         accordance with clause (8), shall immediately be removed from
         office by the President.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016       63

          Judicial Officers and Chief Administrator
   145. (1) The Judicial Service Commission shall appoint judicial       Appointment
officers, as prescribed.                                                 and
                                                                         retirement
   (2) The qualification for appointment as judicial officer shall be    of judicial
                                                                         officers
prescribed.
   (3) A judicial officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty-
five years.
   (4) A judicial officer may retire, with full benefits, on attaining
the age of fifty-five years.
  146. (1) There shall be a Chief Administrator for the Judiciary        Chief
                                                                         Administrator
who shall be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.               of Judiciary
  (2) The functions and qualifications of the Chief Administrator
for the Judiciary shall be prescribed.
                           PART IX
          GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DEVOLVED GOVERNANCE
               System of Devolved Governance
   147. (1) The management and administration of the political,          System of
social, legal and economic affairs of the State shall be devolved        devolved
                                                                         governance
from the national government level to the local government level.
  (2) The concurrent and exclusive functions of the national,
provincial and local government levels are as listed in the Annex
and as prescribed.
   (3) The different levels of government shall observe and adhere
to the following principles:
     (a) good governance, through democratic, effective and
          coherent governance systems and institutions;
     (b) respect for the constitutional jurisdiction of each level of
           government;
     (c) autonomy of the sub-structures; and
     (d) equitable distribution and application of national resources
           to the sub-structures.
   148. (1) Local governance shall be undertaken through sub-            Sub-
                                                                         structures of
structures.                                                              local
                                                                         government
  (2) The Government shall provide adequate resources for the
performance of the functions of the sub-structures.
   64     No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                                           PART X
                   PROVINCES, DISTRICTS, WARDS AND PROVINCIAL ADMINISTRATION
                                 Provinces, Districts and Wards
Provinces,         149. (1) The President may, subject to the approval of the
districts and
wards            National Assembly, create or divide a Province or merge two or
                 more Provinces, as prescribed.
                   (2) A Province shall consist of such number of districts, as
                 prescribed.
                   (3) A district shall consist of such number of wards, as
                 prescribed.
                   (4) A Province, district and ward shall be delimited, as
                 prescribed.
                   (5) Without prejudice to clause (1), sixty percent or more of
                 the registered voters in a Province may petition the President to—
                      (a) merge a Province with another Province; or
                      (b) divide a Province into two or more Provinces.
                    (6) Where the President receives a petition under clause (5),
                 and after due inquiry, the President may, by statutory order, declare
                 the merger of the Province with another Province or the division of
                 the Province into two or more Provinces, subject to ratification by
                 the National Assembly.
                    (7) Where the National Assembly ratifies the establishment of
                 a new Province under this Article, the Electoral Commission shall
                 delineate the boundaries of the Province created.
                                    Provincial Administration
Provincial         150. (1) There shall be established for each Province an
administration
                 administrative secretariat, which shall consist of—
                      (a) a Provincial Minister;
                      (b) a provincial Permanent Secretary; and
                      (c) other staff, as prescribed.
                    (2) The provincial secretariat shall have overall responsibility
                 of the Province and perform other functions as prescribed.
          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)             [No. 2 of 2016 65

                             PART XI
                       LOCAL GOVERNMENT
                 System of Local Government
  151. (1) There is established a local government system               System of
where—                                                                  local
                                                                        government
    (a) functions, responsibilities and resources from the national
          Government and provincial administration are transferred
          to the local authorities in a co-ordinated manner;
    (b) the people’s participation in democratic governance is
          promoted;
    (c) co-operative governance with the national Government,
          provincial administration and local authorities is promoted
          to support and enhance the developmental role of local
          government;
    (d) the capacity of local authorities to initiate, plan, manage
          and execute policies in respect of matters that affect
          the people within their respective districts is enhanced;
    (e) social, spatial, financial and economic planning, at the
          district level, is developed, prioritised and promoted;
    (f) a sound financial base is established for each local
          authority with reliable and predictable sources of
          revenue;
    (g) the performance of persons employed by the national
          Government and provincial administration to provide
          services in the sub-structures is overseen by local
          authorities;
    (h) the provision of Government services is monitored and
          projects are implemented in sub-structures;
    (i)       accountability of local authorities is ensured; and
    (j) the right of local authorities to manage their affairs and
          to form partnerships, networks and associations to assist
          in the management of their respective districts and
          further their development is recognised.
  (2) The local government system shall—
    (a) be based on democratically elected councils;
    (b) promote democratic and accountable exercise of power;
    (c) foster national unity;
   66    No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                    (d) ensure that services are provided to sub-structures in an
                          equitable and sustainable manner;
                    (e) promote social and economic development;
                    (f ) promote a clean, safe and healthy environment; and
                    (g) encourage the involvement of communities and community
                          organisations in matters of local government.
Local            152. (1) A local authority shall—
authorities
                    (a) administer the district;
                    (b) oversee programmes and projects in the district;
                    (c) make by-laws; and
                    (d) perform other prescribed functions.
                  (2)The national Government and the provincial administration
               shall not interfere with or compromise a local authority’s ability or
               right to perform its functions.
                 (3) There shall be a council for each local authority.
                  (4) There shall be a Town Clerk or Council Secretary for each
               local authority and other staff of the local authority, as prescribed.
Election of      153. (1) A councillor shall be elected in accordance with Article
councillors,   47(3) by registered voters resident within the district.
composition
of councils
and tenure        (2)A council shall consist of the following councillors—
                    (a) persons elected in accordance with clause (1);
                    (b) a mayor or council chairperson elected in accordance
                         with Article 154; and
                    (c) not more than three chiefs representing chiefs in the district,
                          elected by the chiefs in the district.
                 (3) The system of electing chiefs specified in clause (2) (b) shall
               be prescribed.
                  (4)A person qualifies to be elected as a councillor, excluding
               councillors specified under clause (2) (b), if that person—
                    (a) is not a Member of Parliament;
                    (b) is not less than nineteen years of age;
                    (c) has obtained, as a minimum academic qualification, a grade
                          twelve certificate or its equivalent;
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016        67

     (d) is a citizen or a holder of a resident permit, resident in the
            district; and
     (e) has a certificate of clearance showing       the payment of
           council taxes, where applicable.
  (5) A council may invite a person, whose presence is in its opinion
desirable, to attend and to participate in the deliberations of the
council but that person shall have no vote.
   (6) The term of a council shall be five years commencing from
the date the councillors are sworn into office after a general election
and ending on the date Parliament is dissolved.
   154. (1) There shall be a mayor and deputy mayor or council             Mayor,
chairperson and deputy council chairperson for every council, as           deputy
                                                                           mayor,
prescribed.                                                                council
                                                                           chairperson
  (2) A mayor and council chairperson shall be elected—                    and deputy
                                                                           council
     (a) directly, in accordance with Article 47 (3) during elections      chairperson
           for councillors, as prescribed; and
     (b) for a term of five years and may be re-elected for one
           further term of five years.
   (3)A deputy mayor and a deputy council chairperson shall be
elected by the councillors from amongst themselves.
   155. A councillor shall act in a manner that is consistent with         Conduct of
a councillor’s civic duties and responsibilities, as prescribed.           councillor

   156. Councillors shall be collectively and individually                 Accountability
                                                                           of
accountable to the national Government and residents in their wards        councillors
and districts, for the performance of their functions.
  157. (1) A councillor shall vacate office on dissolution of a            Vacation of
                                                                           office of
council.                                                                   councillor
                                                                           and
  (2) The office of councillor becomes vacant if—                          vacancies
     (a) the councillor ceases to be a resident of the district;
     (b) the councillor resigns by one month’s notice, in writing, to
           the mayor or council chairperson;
     (c) the councillor becomes disqualified for election under
           Article 153;
     (d) the result of an election for that councillor is nullified by a
           local government elections tribunal established in
           accordance with Article 159;
   68    No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                      (e) the councillor acts contrary to the code of ethics provided
                            for in Article 155;
                      (f)     the councillor has a mental or physical disability that
                            makes the councillor incapable of performing the
                            functions of councillor; or
                      (g) the councillor dies.
                   (3) Where a councillor resigns in accordance with clause (2)
                (b), (c), (d) and (e) the councillor shall not be eligible for re-election
                as councillor for the duration of the term of that council.
By-election       158. (1) Where a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor, council
for council
                chairperson or councillor—
                      (a) the Town Clerk or Council Secretary of the local authority
                            shall, within seven days of the occurrence of the
                            vacancy, inform the Electoral Commission, in writing,
                            of the vacancy; and
                      (b) a by-election shall be held in accordance with Article 57.
                   (2) If a person is elected to the office of mayor, council
                chairperson or councillor in a by-election, that mayor, council
                chairperson or councillor shall serve for the unexpired term of the
                council and be deemed—
                      (a) to have served a full term as mayor, council chairperson
                            or councillor if, at the date on which the councillor
                            assumed office, at least three years remain before the
                            date of the next general election; or
                      (b) not to have served a term of office as mayor, council
                           chairperson or councillor, if, at the date on which the
                           councillor assumed office, less than three years remain
                           before the date of the next general election.
Local             159. (1) The Chief Justice shall establish such number of
government
elections       ad hoc local government elections tribunals as are necessary to
tribunals and   hear whether—
petitions
                      (a) a person has been validly elected as a councillor; or
                      (b) the office of a councillor has become vacant.
                   (2) A local government elections tribunal shall be presided over
                by a magistrate of competent jurisdiction sitting with two legal
                practitioners appointed by the Chief Justice.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016       69

   (3) A person may file an election petition with a local government
elections tribunal to challenge the election of a councillor.
    (4) An election petition shall be heard within thirty days of the
filing of the petition.
   (5) A person may appeal a decision of a local government
elections tribunal to the Constitutional Court.
   (6) A councillor whose election is petitioned shall hold the seat
in the council pending the determination of the election petition.
   (7) The Chief Justice shall make rules for the functions,
composition, appointment of members, tenure of office of members,
procedures and jurisdiction of a local government elections tribunal.
   160. A person who obtains a judgment against a local authority       Enforcement
may enforce the judgment against the local authority after one          of judgment
                                                                        against local
year from the date of the delivery of the judgment.                     authority

  161. A local authority is competent to levy, impose, recover          Revenue of
and retain local taxes, as prescribed.                                  local
                                                                        authorities
  162. (1) There is established the Constituency Development            Constituency
Fund.                                                                   Development
                                                                        Fund
   (2) The appropriation of monies to the Constituency
Development Fund and the management, disbursement, utilisation
and accountability of the Constituency Development Fund shall be
prescribed.
  163. (1) There is established the Local Government                    Local
Equalisation Fund.                                                      Government
                                                                        Equalisation
                                                                        Fund and
  (2) Parliament shall annually appropriate monies to the Local         funds for
Government Equalisation Fund which shall be disbursed by the            local
Ministry responsible for finance to local authorities.                  authorities

    (3)The Government may provide additional funds and grants to
a local authority, as prescribed.
  164. The following shall be prescribed:                               Legislation
                                                                        on local
     (a) regulation of local authorities;                               authorities

     (b) sub-structures and their relationships;
     (c) financial control and accountability of a local authority;
     (d) raising of loans, grants and other financial instruments by
           local authorities;
   70     No. 2 of 2016]             Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                      (e) election of councillors; and
                      (f) the effective implementation of this Part.

                                               PART XII
                                 CHIEFTAINCY AND HOUSE OF CHIEFS
Institution of      165. (1) The institution of chieftaincy and traditional institutions
chieftaincy      are guaranteed and shall exist in accordance with the culture,
and
traditional      customs and traditions of the people to whom they apply.
institutions
                   (2) Parliament shall not enact legislation which—
                      (a) confers on a person or authority the right to recognise or
                            withdraw the recognition of a chief; or
                      (b) derogates from the honour and dignity of the institution of
                            chieftaincy.
Status of          166.    The institution of chieftaincy—
institution of
chieftaincy           (a) is a corporation sole with perpetual succession and
                            capacity to sue and be sued; and
                      (b) has capacity to hold property in trust for its subjects.
Rights and         167.    A chief—
privileges of
chiefs                (a) may own property in a personal capacity; and
                      (b) shall enjoy privileges and benefits—
                               (i)    bestowed on the office of chief by or under
                                      culture, custom and tradition; and
                                (ii) attached to the office of chief, as prescribed.
Participation      168. (1) Subject to clause (2), a chief may seek and hold a
of chiefs in     public office.
public affairs
                    (2) A chief who seeks to hold office in a political party or election
                 or appointment to a State office, except that of councillor, shall
                 abdicate the chief’s throne.
                    (3) The role of a chief in the management, control and sharing
                 of natural and other resources in the Chiefdom shall be prescribed.
House of           169. (1) There is established a House of Chiefs.
Chiefs and
function           (2) The House of Chiefs shall consist of five chiefs from each
                 province, elected by the chiefs in a Province, as prescribed.
           Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)              [No. 2 of 2016       71

  (3) The members of the House of Chiefs shall annually elect a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the House of Chiefs, from
amongst themselves.
   (4) Notwithstanding clause (3), the assumption of office as
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the House of Chiefs shall
rotate annually amongst the chiefs from each province.
  (5) The functions of the House of Chiefs are to —
     (a) consider and discuss a Bill relating to custom or tradition
           referred to it by the President, before the Bill is
           introduced into the National Assembly;
     (b) initiate, discuss and make recommendations to the National
            Assembly regarding socio-economic development in the
            Province;
     (c) initiate, discuss and decide on matters relating to customary
            law and practice;
     (d) initiate, discuss and make recommendations to a local
           authority regarding the welfare of communities in a local
           authority;
     (e) make proposals on areas in customary law that require
          codification;
     (f)      advise the Government on traditional and customary
             matters; and
     (g) perform other functions as prescribed.
  170. (1) A Member of the House of Chiefs—                               Tenure of
                                                                          office and
     (a) shall hold office for a term of five years and is eligible for   vacancy
           election for a further term of five years; and
     (b) may resign by one month’s notice, in writing, to the
          Chairperson.
  (2) The office of a member of the House of Chiefs becomes
vacant if the Chief—
     (a) dies;
     (b) ceases to be a chief;
     (c) resigns;
   72      No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                     (d) is convicted of an offence;
                     (e) is an undischarged bankrupt; or
                     (f) has a mental or physical disability that makes the chief
                          incapable of performing the functions of a member of
                          the House of Chiefs.
Staff of           171. (1) There shall be a Clerk of the House of Chiefs and
House of        other staff, as prescribed.
Chiefs
                   (2) The office of the Clerk of the House of Chiefs and other
                staff of the House of Chiefs are offices in the public service.
Legislation       172.     The following matters shall be prescribed—
on House of
Chiefs               (a) the procedures and processes of the House of Chiefs;
                     (b) the emoluments of the Clerk and other staff of the House
                           of Chiefs;
                     (c) the application of the privileges and immunities of a Member
                           of Parliament to a member of the House of Chiefs; and
                     (d) other matters necessary for the better carrying out of the
                           purposes of this Part.

                                            PART XIII
                                         PUBLIC SERVICE
                                     Values and Principles
Values and         173. (1) The guiding values and principles of the public service
principles of
public          include the following—
service
                     (a) maintenance and promotion of the highest standards of
                          professional ethics and integrity;
                     (b) promotion of efficient, effective and economic use of
                          national resources;
                     (c) effective, impartial, fair and equitable provision of public
                           services;
                     (d) encouragement of people to participate in the process of
                           policy making;
                     (e) prompt, efficient and timely response to people’s needs;
                     (f)      commitment to the implementation of public policy
                            and programmes;
                     (g) accountability for administrative acts;
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016       73

     (h) proactively providing the public with timely, accessible
           and accurate information;
     (i) merit as the basis of appointment and promotion;
     (j) adequate and equal opportunities for appointments, training
           and advancement of members of both gender and
           members of all ethnic groups; and
     (k) representation of persons with disabilities in the composition
           of the public service at all levels.
  (2) The values and principles specified in clause (1) apply to
service—
     (a) at national, provincial and local government levels; and
     (b) to all State organs and State institutions.
  (3) A public officer shall not be—
     (a) victimised or discriminated against for having performed
           functions in good faith in accordance with this
           Constitution or other law; or
     (b) removed from office, reduced in rank or otherwise
          punished without just cause and due process.

            Constituting Offices for Public Service
  174. (1) Subject to the recommendations of the relevant                 Constituting
                                                                          offices for
Service Commission, the power to constitute offices for the public        public
service and to abolish those offices vests in the President.              service

  (2) The President shall not abolish an office in the public service
while there is a substantive holder of the office.
  (3) The President may, by statutory instrument, declare that
an office constituted by the President shall not be an office in the
public service.
  (4) Appointment to an office declared by the President not to
be an office in the public service shall be made by the President.
  175. For the purposes of this Constitution, a person shall not          Holding of
                                                                          office in
be considered as holding an office in the public service by reason        public
only that the person is in receipt of emoluments in respect of service    service
under or for the Government.
   74    No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                                Constitutional Office Holders
Secretary to     176. (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Cabinet who shall
Cabinet        be appointed by the President, in consultation with the Civil Service
               Commission, subject to ratification by the National Assembly.
                 (2) The Secretary to the Cabinet shall—
                    (a) be chief advisor to the President on the management of
                          the public service;
                    (b) be the head of the public service and responsible to the
                          President for securing the general efficiency and
                          effectiveness of the public service;
                    (c) ensure that public services are delivered to the public
                         efficiently;
                    (d) in accordance with instructions of the President—
                             (i) arrange the affairs of Cabinet;
                             (ii) attend meetings of Cabinet;
                             (iii) cause to be written and kept minutes of meetings
                                    of Cabinet; and
                             (iv) convey decisions made by Cabinet to appropriate
                                   authorities;
                    (e) monitor the implementation of Government policies and
                         Cabinet decisions; and
                    (f) perform other functions as prescribed.
                 (3) A person qualifies to be appointed as Secretary to the
               Cabinet if that person has or had at least ten years experience as a
               permanent secretary or equivalent rank.
                  (4) The term of office of the Secretary to the Cabinet shall be
               five years, subject to renewal for further terms.
                 (5) The Secretary to the Cabinet may resign from office by
               giving three months’ notice, in writing, to the President.
Attorney-        177. (1) There shall be an Attorney-General, who shall be
General        appointed by the President, subject to ratification by the National
               Assembly.
                 (2) The Attorney-General shall not hold another public office.
                 (3) The Attorney-General shall be a person qualified to be
               appointed as a judge.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016       75

   (4) The Attorney-General shall not be subject to the direction
or control of a person or an authority in the performance of the
Attorney-General’s functions.
  (5) The Attorney-General is the chief legal adviser to the
Government and shall—
     (a) be head of the Attorney-General’s Chambers;
     (b) sign Government Bills to be presented to the National
           Assembly;
     (c) represent the Government in civil proceedings to which
           Government is a party;
     (d) give advice on an agreement, treaty or convention to which
           Government intends to become a party or in respect of
           which the Government has an interest before they are
           concluded, except where the National Assembly
           otherwise directs, and subject to conditions as prescribed;
           and
     (e) perform other functions, as prescribed.
  (6) The Attorney-General’s Chambers shall be devolved to
the Provinces and progressively to districts.
  178. (1) The office of the Attorney-General becomes vacant Vacancy in
                                                             office of
if—                                                          Attorney-
                                                                         General
     (a) the Attorney-General is removed from office by the
           President;
     (b) another person assumes the office of President;
     (c) the Attorney-General dies; or
     (d) the Attorney-General has a mental or physical disability
           that makes the Attorney-General incapable of performing
           the functions of that office.
   (2) The Attorney-General may resign from office by giving
three months’ notice, in writing, to the President.
  179. (1) There shall be a Solicitor-General who shall be               Solicitor-
appointed by the President, subject to ratification by the National      General
Assembly.
   (2) A person qualifies for appointment as Solicitor-General if
that person is qualified for appointment as a judge.
  (3) The Solicitor-General shall not hold another public office.
   76    No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                 (4) The office of Solicitor-General becomes vacant if—
                    (a) the Solicitor-General is removed from office by the
                          President;
                    (b) another person assumes the office of President;
                    (c) the Solicitor-General dies; or
                    (d) the Solicitor-General has a mental or physical disability
                          that makes the Solicitor-General incapable of performing
                          the functions of that office.
                  (5) The Solicitor-General shall assist the Attorney-General in
               the performance of the Attorney- General’s functions.
                 (6) A function conferred on the Attorney-General by this
               Constitution or other law shall be performed by the Solicitor-General
               when the Attorney-General is unable to act owing to illness or
               absence from office for a reason.
                  (7) The Solicitor-General may resign from office by giving
               three months’ notice, in writing, to the President.
Director of      180. (1) There shall be a Director of Public Prosecutions who
Public
Prosecutions   shall be appointed by the President, subject to ratification by the
               National Assembly.
                 (2) A person qualifies for appointment as Director of Public
               Prosecutions if that person—
                    (a) has experience in undertaking criminal trials; and
                    (b) is qualified to be appointed as a judge.
                  (3) The Director of Public Prosecutions is the chief prosecutor
               for the Government and head of the National Prosecutions Authority.
                  (4)The Director of Public Prosecutions may—
                    (a) institute and undertake criminal proceedings against a
                          person before a court, other than a court-martial, for an
                          offence alleged to have been committed by that person;
                    (b) take over and continue criminal proceedings instituted or
                          undertaken by another person or authority; and
                    (c) discontinue, at any stage before judgment is delivered,
                          criminal proceedings instituted or undertaken by the
                          Director of Public Prosecutions or another person or
                          authority.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                   [No. 2 of 2016       77

   (5) For the purposes of clause (4), an appeal from a judgment, a        House of
                                                                           Chiefs and
case stated or to a question of law reserved shall be part of the          functions
criminal proceedings.
   (6) The power conferred on the Director of Public Prosecutions
under clause (4)(c) shall not be exercised in relation to an appeal
by a convicted person, a case stated or a question of law reserved
at the instance of that person.
   (7) The Director of Public Prosecutions shall not be subject to
the direction or control of a person or an authority in the performance
of the functions of that office, except that the Director of Public
Prosecutions shall have regard to the public interest, administration
of justice, the integrity of the judicial system and the need to prevent
and avoid abuse of the legal process.
   (8)The functions of the Director of Public Prosecutions may
be exercised in person or by a public officer or legal practitioner,
authorised by the Director of Public Prosecutions, acting under the
general or special instructions of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
   (9) The National Prosecutions Authority shall be established as
prescribed and shall devolve to the provinces and progressively to
the districts.
   181. Where the Director of Public Prosecutions is absent from           Performance
Zambia or is unable to perform the functions of office due to illness      of functions
                                                                           of Director
or other cause, the President shall appoint a person qualified to          of Public
                                                                           Prosecutions
perform the functions of Director of Public Prosecutions to perform        during
those functions until that appointment is revoked or until the Director    absence,
                                                                           illness or
of Public Prosecutions returns to office.                                  other cause

  182. (1) Subject to this Article, the Director of Public                 Tenure of
                                                                           office of
Prosecutions shall retire from office on attaining the age of sixty        Director of
years.                                                                     Public
                                                                           Prosecutions
  (2) The Director of Public Prosecutions may retire, with full
benefits, on attaining the age of fifty-five years.
   (3) The Director of Public Prosecutions may be removed from
office on the same grounds and procedure as apply to a judge.
  (4) The Director of Public Prosecutions may resign from office
by three months’ notice, in writing, to the President.
   78    No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Secretary to     183. (1) There shall be a Secretary to the Treasury who shall
Treasury       be appointed by the President, in consultation with the Civil Service
               Commission, subject to ratification by the National Assembly.
                 (2) The Secretary to the Treasury shall be the chief controlling
               officer of the Government.
                 (3) The Secretary to the Treasury shall—
                    (a) be responsible and accountable for—
                             (i) the proper financial management and expenditure
                                    of public monies appropriated to a State organ,
                                    Province, local authority, State institution or
                                    other prescribed body; and
                             (ii) monies raised from sources within or outside
                                   Zambia by a Province, local authority, State
                                   institution or other prescribed body;
                    (b) oversee the formulation and implementation of the macro-
                          economic frameworks and socio-economic plans of the
                          Republic;
                    (c) provide a regulatory framework for sound financial
                         management;
                    (d) cause to be prepared annual estimates of revenue and
                         expenditure, supplementary estimates of expenditure and
                         the budget; and
                    (e) carry out other prescribed functions.
                 (4) A person qualifies to be appointed as Secretary to the
               Treasury if that person qualifies for appointment as Governor of
               the Bank of Zambia.
                 (5) The term of office of the Secretary to the Treasury shall
               be five years, subject to renewal for further terms.
                  (6) The Secretary to the Treasury may resign from office by
               three months’ notice, in writing, to the President.
Permanent        184. (1) The President shall, on the advice of the Civil Service
Secretaries
               Commission, appoint a Permanent Secretary for a Province,
               ministry or department.
                 (2) A Permanent Secretary shall—
                    (a) carry out or cause to be carried out the portfolio functions
                          of the provincial administration, ministry or department;
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016       79

     (b) advise the Minister or provincial Minister with respect to
           the activities, projects and programmes of the Province,
           ministry or department;
     (c) cause to be implemented the policies of the Government
           and decisions of Cabinet;
     (d) be responsible and accountable for the proper financial
           management and expenditure of public monies
           appropriated to the Province, ministry or department;
           and
     (e) be responsible and accountable for the management of
           human resources in the provincial secretariat, ministry
           or department.

                         Public Officers
   185. (1) The President has, in accordance with and subject           Appointment
to the other provisions of this Constitution, the power to—             of public
                                                                        officers
     (a) appoint and confirm public officers;
     (b) exercise disciplinary control over public officers; and
     (c) terminate the employment of a public officer.
   (2) The President’s functions, as specified in clause (1), shall
be exercised by the relevant Service Commission as specified in
this Constitution and as prescribed.
  (3) A person shall not be regarded as disqualified for
appointment to an office to which a public officer is qualified to be
appointed by reason only that the office is held by a person who is
on leave of absence pending relinquishment of that office.
  (4) A function of a service commission may be delegated to a
public officer, as prescribed.
   186. (1) A public officer who seeks election, or is appointed,       Participation
                                                                        in politics
to a State office shall resign.
  (2) Clause (1) applies to a Constitutional office holder.

                           PART XIV
                         PENSION BENEFIT
  187. (1) An employee, including a public officer and                  Pension
Constitutional office holder, has a right to a pension benefit.         benefit

  (2) A pension benefit shall not be withheld or altered to that
employee’s disadvantage.
   80       No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (3) The law to be applied with respect to a pension benefit–
                     (a) before the commencement of this Constitution, shall be
                           the law that was in force immediately before the date
                           on which the pension benefit was granted or the law in
                           force at a later date that is not less favourable to that
                           employee; and
                     (b) after the commencement of this Constitution, shall be the
                           law in force on the date on which the pension benefit
                           was granted or the law in force at a later date that is not
                           less favourable to that employee.
Review of          188. (1) A pension benefit shall be reviewed periodically to
pension         take into account actuarial assessments.
benefit and
tax               (2) A pension benefit shall be exempt from tax.
exemption

Payment of        189. (1) A pension benefit shall be paid promptly and regularly.
pension
benefits          (2) Where a pension benefit is not paid on a person’s last
                working day, that person shall stop work but the person’s name
                shall be retained on the payroll, until payment of the pension benefit
                based on the last salary received by that person while on the payroll.

                                          PART XV
                                 DEFENCE AND NATIONAL SECURITY
Principles        190. (1) The Defence Force and national security services
relating to     shall—
Defence
Force and            (a) be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined and
national
security                   competent;
services
                     (b) be non-partisan;
                     (c) not further the interests or cause of a particular
                           organisation; and
                     (d) not act against a political interest or cause permitted in
                           this Constitution or as prescribed.
                  (2) Clause (1) shall not prevent a member of the Defence
                Force and national security services from registering as a voter or
                voting in an election or a referendum.
Status of         191.    The Defence Force and national security services shall
Defence         be—
Force and
national             (a) subordinate to civilian authority, as vested in the State
security
services                   organs; and
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016       81

     (b) adequately and properly equipped to enable them effectively
           perform their functions.
  192. (1) There is established the Defence Force of Zambia              Establishment
                                                                         of Defence
consisting of—                                                           Force and
                                                                         functions
     (a) the Zambia Army;
     (b) the Zambia Air Force;
     (c) the Zambia National Service, as an auxiliary unit; and
     (d) other units, as prescribed.
  (2) The Defence Force shall—
     (a) preserve and defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity
           of the Republic;
     (b) foster harmony and understanding between the Zambia
           Army, Zambia Air Force, an auxiliary unit and members
           of society; and
     (c) co-operate with State organs and State institutions in times
           of public emergencies and national disasters.
  193. (1) There are established the following national security         Establishment
                                                                         of national
services—                                                                security
                                                                         services and
     (a) the Zambia Police Service;                                      functions
     (b) the Zambia Security Intelligence Service;
     (c) the Zambia Correctional Service; and
     (d) any other national security service, as prescribed.
  (2) The Zambia Police Service shall—
     (a) protect life and property;
     (b) preserve peace and maintain law and order;
     (c) ensure the security of the people;
     (d) detect and prevent crime;
     (e) uphold the Bill of Rights;
     (f) foster and promote good relationships with the Defence
           Force, other national security services and members of
           society; and
     (g) perform other functions as prescribed.
   82     No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (3) The Zambia Security Intelligence Service shall—
                     (a) ensure national security by undertaking security intelligence
                           and counter intelligence;
                     (b) prevent a person from suspending, overthrowing or illegally
                           abrogating this Constitution; and
                     (c) perform other functions as prescribed.
                  (4) The Zambia Correctional Service shall—
                     (a) manage, regulate and ensure the security of prisons and
                          correctional centres; and
                     (b) perform other functions as prescribed.
Qualification     194. A person is qualified to serve as a member of the Defence
to serve in     Force and national security services if the person is—
Defence
Force and            (a) a citizen who does not hold dual citizenship; and
national
security
service
                     (b) qualified as prescribed.
Deployment        195. (1) The President may deploy personnel of the Defence
outside
Republic        Force outside the Republic.
                  (2) Where the President deploys personnel of the Defence
                Force outside the Republic, the President shall, as soon as is
                reasonably practicable, inform the National Assembly of the
                deployment.
Prohibition       196. Except as provided in this Constitution, a person shall not—
of activities
relating to         (a) raise or participate in the raising of an armed force;
defence and         (b) establish or participate in the establishment of a defence
national
security                  force or national security service; or
                    (c) establish or participate in the establishment of a unit of
                          the Defence Force or national security service.
Legislation       197. The following shall be prescribed:
on Defence
Force and           (a) the regulation of the Defence Force and national security
national                  services;
security
services            (b) the organs and structures of the Defence Force and
                          national security services;
                    (c) the operations and administration of the Defence Force
                          and national security services;
                    (d) the recruitment of persons into the Defence Force and
                          national security services, which shall reflect the regional
                          diversity of the people of Zambia;
      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016       83

     (e) the appointment, qualifications, placement, transfer,
           discipline and retirement of defence and security chiefs
           and other personnel of the Defence Force and national
           security services;
     (f) the emoluments of personnel and members of the Defence
            Force and national security services;
     (g) the procedures and processes for deployment of the
           personnel of the Defence Force; and
     (h) other functions as prescribed.

                           PART XVI
                   PUBLIC FINANCE AND BUDGET
   198. The guiding principles of public finance include the            Principles
following:                                                              relating to
                                                                        public
     (a) transparency and accountability in the development or          finance
           formulation of macro-economic frameworks, socio-
           economic plans and the budget;
     (b) promotion of a public finance system that ensures that—
             (i) the burden of taxation is shared fairly;
             (ii) revenue raised nationally is shared equitably among
                    the different levels of government; and
             (iii) expenditure promotes the equitable development
                    of the country;
     (c) sustainable public borrowing to ensure inter-generational
           equity; and
     (d) prudent and responsible use of public resources.
  199. (1) A tax shall not be imposed, except as prescribed.            Imposition
                                                                        of tax
   (2) Where legislation confers power on a person or an authority
to waive or vary a prescribed tax the power shall be exercised
through a statutory instrument.
  (3) A report explaining the waiver or variation of a tax shall be
submitted to the National Assembly within twenty-one days of the
publication of the statutory instrument.
  200. (1) There is established a Consolidated Fund to which            Consolidated
                                                                        Fund
shall be credited the revenues and other monies accruing to the
Treasury.
  84     No. 2 of 2016] Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

               (2)   Clause (1) does not apply to monies—
                     (a) prescribed for a public fund established for a specific
                          purpose; or
                     (b) that a State organ or State institution may retain for the
                           purpose of defraying the expenses of the State organ or
                           State institution, as prescribed.
Withdrawal       201. (1) Monies shall not be withdrawn from the Consolidated
from           Fund except—
Consolidated
Fund
                     (a) to meet expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund by
                           this Constitution or as prescribed; or
                     (b) where the issuance of those monies has been authorised
                          by a warrant signed by the President, an Appropriation
                          Act or a Supplementary Appropriation Act in accordance
                          with Article 203.
                  (2) The investment or lending of monies forming part of the
               Consolidated Fund, in accordance with Articles 206 and 207,
               respectively, shall not be considered a withdrawal from the
               Consolidated Fund.
Annual            202. (1) The Minister responsible for finance shall prepare
financial
estimates of
               and lay before the National Assembly in each financial year, not
revenue and    later than ninety days before the commencement of the next financial
expenditure
               year, estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Republic.
                  (2) The Minister responsible for finance shall, when presenting
               the estimates of revenue and expenditure, in accordance with clause
               (1), specify the maximum limits that the Government intends to
               borrow or lend in that financial year.
                  (3) In a year where a general election is held, the Minister
               responsible for finance shall cause to be prepared and laid before
               the National Assembly, within ninety days of the swearing in of the
               President, estimates of revenue and expenditure for the Republic
               for the next financial year.
                  (4) The National Assembly may vary estimates of revenue
               and expenditure but shall not amend the total amount of estimates
               of revenue and expenditure.
                 (5) The National Assembly shall, by a resolution of the Members
               of Parliament, approve the financial estimates of revenue and
               expenditure for the next financial year.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016 85

  203. (1) Where estimates of revenue and expenditure have                 Appropriation
                                                                           Act,
been approved by the National Assembly in accordance with Article          Supplementary
202, the Minister responsible for finance shall lay, before the National   Appropriation
                                                                           Act and
Assembly for enactment, an Appropriation Bill in respect of the            Excess
approved estimates of expenditure.                                         Expenditure
                                                                           Appropriation
   (2) The Minister responsible for finance shall, where the               Act
amount appropriated in an Appropriation Act for a financial year is
insufficient to meet expenditure in that financial year, lay before
the National Assembly for approval, in accordance with Article
202 (5), a supplementary estimate of expenditure.
   (3) Where a supplementary estimate of expenditure has been
approved by the National Assembly, the Minister responsible for
finance shall lay, before the National Assembly for enactment, a
Supplementary Appropriation Bill in respect of the approved
supplementary estimate of expenditure.
   (4) Where there is an urgent need to incur expenditure for a
purpose that has not been appropriated under the Appropriation
Act for that financial year and it would not be in the public interest
to delay the appropriation of the expenditure until a supplementary
estimate is approved by the National Assembly, in accordance with
clauses (2) and (3), the President may, subject to Article 204, issue
a warrant authorising the expenditure and withdrawal from the
Consolidated Fund.
   (5) The Minister responsible for finance shall present the warrant
referred to in clause (4) to the relevant parliamentary committee
for approval.
   (6) The parliamentary committee shall consider the warrant
within forty-eight hours of its presentation by the Minister
responsible for finance.
   (7) Where expenditure is incurred in accordance with clause
(4), the Minister responsible for finance shall, in that financial year,
lay an Excess Expenditure Appropriation Bill before the National
Assembly for enactment.
   (8) Where it is not practicable to lay an Excess Expenditure
Appropriation Bill before the National Assembly, in accordance
with clause (7), the Minister responsible for finance shall lay the
Excess Expenditure Appropriation Bill before the National Assembly
during the first sitting of the National Assembly after the end of the
preceding financial year.
  86     No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Limitation        204. (1) The issuance of a warrant, in accordance with Article
and
conditions of   203 (4), shall be subject to limitations and conditions, as prescribed.
warrant
                   (2) The President shall, immediately after signing a warrant in
                accordance with Article 203 (4), cause a copy of the warrant to be
                transmitted to the Auditor-General and Parliament.
Budget and        205.    The following shall be prescribed:
planning
legislation          (a) the financial management and regulation of public funds;
                     (b) the preparation of medium and long-term financing
                           frameworks and development plans;
                     (c) the budget preparation process;
                     (d) public participation, at all levels of government, in the
                          formulation of financing frameworks, development plans
                          and preparation of annual budgets;
                     (e) the content of the financial report of the Republic provided
                           for in Article 211; and
                     (f) the control and disbursement of appropriated funds.
Investment        206. (1) Monies forming part of the Consolidated Fund may
of public
funds           be invested into readily marketable securities and deposits or other
                secure investments, with a financial institution approved by the
                Minister responsible for finance.
                  (2) The investment of monies made in accordance with clause
                (1) shall be prescribed.
Borrowing         207.    (1) The Government may, as prescribed—
and lending
by                   (a) raise a loan or grant on behalf of itself, a State organ,
Government
                           State institution or other institution;
                     (b) guarantee a loan on behalf of a State organ, State institution
                           or other institution; or
                     (c) enter into an agreement to give a loan or grant out of the
                           Consolidated Fund, other public fund or public account.
                  (2) Legislation enacted under clause (1) shall provide—
                     (a) for the category, nature and other terms and conditions of
                           a loan, grant or guarantee, that will require the approval
                           by the National Assembly before the loan, grant or
                           guarantee is executed; and
          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)             [No. 2 of 2016       87

        (b) that any monies received in respect of a loan or grant
              approved by the National Assembly shall be paid into
              the Consolidated Fund, or other public fund or public
              account.
  208. (1) A public debt shall be a charge on the Consolidated          Public debt
Fund or other public fund.
   (2) For the purposes of this Article, “public debt” includes the
interest on that debt, sinking fund payments in respect of that debt
and the costs, charges and expenses incidental to the management
of that debt.
  209. (1) There is established a Compensation Fund for the             Compensation
purpose of settling claims against the State.                           Fund

  (2) The management of the Compensation Fund shall be
prescribed.
   210. (1) A State organ, State institution and other public office    Public
shall procure goods or services, in accordance with a system that       procurement
                                                                        and disposal
is fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost-effective, as     of State
prescribed.                                                             assets

   (2) A major State asset shall be sold, transferred or otherwise
disposed of, as prescribed, subject to the approval of the National
Assembly signified by a vote of at least two-thirds of the Members
of Parliament.
   (3) For the purposes of this Article, “major State asset” includes
a parastatal and equity held by the Government, as prescribed.
   211. (1) The Minister responsible for finance shall, within three    Financial
months after the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to      report of
                                                                        Republic
the Auditor-General the financial report of the Republic in respect
of the preceding financial year.
   (2) The Auditor-General shall, within two months of receipt of
the financial report, examine the financial report and express an
opinion on the report.
   (3) The Minister responsible for finance shall, within one month
after the receipt of the Auditor-General’s opinion, lay the financial
report, with the Auditor-General’s opinion, before the National
Assembly.
  (4)     The financial report shall include information on—
        (a) revenue received by the Republic during that financial
              year;
   88       No. 2 of 2016]      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                     (b) the expenditure of the Republic during that financial year;
                     (c) gifts, donations and aid-in-kind received on behalf of the
                           Republic in that financial year, their value and how they
                           were disposed of;
                     (d) debt repayments;
                     (e) payments made in that financial year for purposes other
                           than expenditure;
                     (f) the financial position of the Republic at the end of that
                           financial year; and
                     (g) other information as prescribed.
Auditor-           212. The Auditor-General shall, not later than nine months
General’s
report          after the end of a financial year, submit an audit report to the
                President and the National Assembly, on the accounts of the
                Republic audited in respect of the preceding financial year.

                                           PART XVII
                                          CENTRAL BANK
Bank of           213. (1) There is established the Bank of Zambia which shall
Zambia
                be the central bank of the Republic.
                  (2) The functions of the Bank of Zambia are to—
                     (a) issue the currency of the Republic;
                     (b) determine monetary policy; and
                     (c) regulate banking and financial services, banks, financial
                           and non-banking institutions, as prescribed.
                  (3) There is constituted a Board of Directors for the Bank of
                Zambia whose composition shall be prescribed.
                  (4) The functions of the Bank of Zambia vest in the Board of
                Directors and shall be performed as prescribed.
                  (5) The Bank of Zambia shall not be subject to the direction or
                control of a person or an authority in the performance of its
                functions.
Governor of       214. (1) There shall be a Governor of the Bank of Zambia
Bank of
Zambia          who shall be appointed by the President, subject to ratification by
                the National Assembly, and who shall be—
                     (a) a citizen;
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                  [No. 2 of 2016 89

     (b) a person who has specialised training and experience in
           economics, finance, accounting, banking, law or other
           field relevant to banking, as prescribed; and
     (c) a person of proven integrity.
  (2) The Governor shall be the Chairperson of the Board of
Directors.
  215. The following shall be prescribed:                                Legislation
                                                                         on Bank of
     (a) additional functions, operations and management of the          Zambia
           Bank of Zambia;
     (b) appointment, qualifications and tenure of office of the
          Board of Directors;
     (c) election of a Vice-Chairperson of the Board of Directors;
     (d) tenure of office and emoluments of the Governor;
     (e) appointment, qualifications, tenure of office, functions and
           emoluments of the Deputy-Governor;
     (f) recruitment, and emoluments of members of staff of the
           Bank of Zambia; and
     (g) other matters necessary for the performance of the
          functions of the Bank of Zambia.

                        PART XVIII
     SERVICES, COMMISSIONS AND OTHER INDEPENDENT OFFICES
  216. A commission shall—                                               Principles
                                                                         relating to
     (a) be subject only to this Constitution and the law;               commissions
     (b) be independent and not be subject to the control of a
          person or an authority in the performance of its functions;
     (c) act with dignity, professionalism, propriety and integrity;
     (d) be non-partisan; and
     (e) be impartial in the exercise of its authority.

              Parliamentary Service Commission
  217. (1) There is established the Parliamentary Service.               Parliamentary
                                                                         Service
   (2) The office of the Clerk of the National Assembly, members
of staff of the Parliamentary Service Commission and members
of staff of the office of the Clerk, as prescribed, are offices in the
Parliamentary Service.
   90      No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Parliamentary     218. (1) There is established the Parliamentary Service
Service
Commission      Commission.
                  (2) The Parliamentary Service Commission shall—
                        (a) appoint the Clerk of the National Assembly;
                        (b) constitute offices in the Parliamentary Service;
                        (c) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from officers
                              of the Parliamentary Service;
                        (d) ensure efficient and effective functioning of the National
                              Assembly;
                        (e) have financial oversight of the Parliamentary Service and
                              the National Assembly; and
                        (f) perform such other functions as prescribed.

                                    Judicial Service Commission
Judicial          219.      (1) There is established the Judicial Service.
Service
                  (2) The office of judge, judicial officer, the members of staff
                of the Judicial Service Commission and such other officers as
                prescribed, are offices in the Judicial Service.

Judicial          220.      (1) There is established the Judicial Service Commission.
Service
Commission        (2)     The Judicial Service Commission shall—
                        (a) constitute offices in the Judicial Service;
                        (b) make recommendations to the President on the appointment
                             of judges;
                        (c) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from judicial
                              officers; and
                        (d) carry out a function provided for in this Constitution, or as
                              prescribed.

                                     Civil Service Commission
Civil Service     221.      (1) There is established the Civil Service.
                  (2) The office of the Secretary to the Cabinet, Secretary to
                the Treasury, Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet, civil servants, the
                members of staff of the Civil Service Commission and other public
                officers as prescribed, are offices in the Civil Service.
         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016      91

  222. (1) There is established the Civil Service Commission.           Civil Service
                                                                        Commission
  (2)     The Civil Service Commission shall—
        (a) constitute offices in the Civil Service;
        (b) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from officers
              in the Civil Service, excluding a Constitutional office
              holder; and
        (c) perform such other functions as prescribed.

                  Teaching Service Commission
  223. (1) There is established the Teaching Service.                   Teaching
                                                                        Service
   (2) The teachers serving as public officers excluding civil
servants, the members of staff of the Teaching Service Commission
and other public officers, as prescribed, are offices in the Teaching
Service.
  224. (1) There is established the Teaching Service Commission.        Teaching
                                                                        Service
  (2) The Teaching Service Commission shall—                            Commission

        (a) constitute offices in the Teaching Service;
        (b) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from officers
              of the Teaching Service; and
        (c) perform such other functions as prescribed.

            Zambia Correctional Service Commission
  225. (1) There is established the Zambia Correctional Service         Zambia
                                                                        Correctional
Commission for the Zambia Correctional Service established in           Service
Article 193.                                                            Commission
  (2) The office of Commissioner-General of Correctional
Service, Deputy Commissioners-General of Correctional Service,
Commissioners of Correctional Service, Assistant Commissioners
of Correctional Service, Correctional officers and wardens,
members of staff of the Zambia Correctional Service Commission
and such other public officers as prescribed, are offices in the
Zambia Correctional Service.
  (3) The Zambia Correctional Service Commission shall—
        (a) constitute offices in the Zambia Correctional Service;
        (b) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from officers
              of the Zambia Correctional Service; and
        (c) perform such other functions as prescribed.
  92   No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                          Zambia Police Service Commission
Zambia         226. (1) There is established the Zambia Police Service
Police       Commission for the Zambia Police Service established in Article
Service
Commission   193.
                (2) The office of the Inspector-General of Police, the Deputy
             Inspector-General of Police, police officers, the members of staff
             of the Zambia Police Service Commission and other public officers
             as prescribed, are offices in the Zambia Police Service.
               (3) The Zambia Police Service Commission shall—
                  (a) constitute offices in the Zambia Police Service;
                  (b) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from officers
                        of the Zambia Police Service; and
                   (c) perform such other functions as prescribed.

                       Local Government Service Commission
Local          227.   (1) There is established the Local Government Service.
Government
Service         (2) The office of the Town Clerk, Council Secretary, members
             of staff of the Local Government Service Commission, the members
             of staff of local authorities and other local government staff, as
             prescribed, are offices in the Local Government Service.
Local          228. (1) There is established the Local Government Service
Government   Commission.
Service
Commission
               (2) The Local Government Service Commission shall—
                  (a) appoint the Town Clerk and Council Secretary of a local
                        authority;
                  (b) constitute offices in the Local Government Service;
                  (c) appoint, confirm, promote and hear appeals from officers
                        of the Local Government Service;
                  (d) ensure efficient and effective functioning of local
                       authorities; and
                  (e) perform such other functions as prescribed.
                           Electoral Commission of Zambia
Electoral       229. (1) There is established the Electoral Commission of
Commission   Zambia which shall have offices in Provinces and progressively in
of Zambia
             districts.
      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                   [No. 2 of 2016   93

  (2) The Electoral Commission shall—
     (a) implement the electoral process;
     (b) conduct elections and referenda;
     (c) register voters;
     (d) settle minor electoral disputes, as prescribed;
     (e) regulate the conduct of voters and candidates;
     (f) accredit observers and election agents, as prescribed;
     (g) delimit electoral boundaries; and
     (h) perform such other functions as prescribed.

                 Human Rights Commission
   230. (1) There is established the Human Rights Commission          Human
                                                                      Rights
which shall have offices in the Provinces and progressively in        Commission
districts.
   (2) The Human Rights Commission shall ensure that the Bill
of Rights is upheld and protected.
  (3) The Human Rights Commission shall—
     (a) investigate and report on the observance of rights and
           freedoms;
     (b) take necessary steps to secure appropriate redress where
           rights and freedoms are violated;
     (c) endeavour to resolve a dispute through negotiation,
          mediation or conciliation;
     (d) carry out research on rights and freedoms and related
          matters;
     (e) conduct civic education on rights and freedoms; and
     (f) perform such other functions as prescribed.

         Gender Equity and Equality Commission
  231. (1) There is established the Gender Equity and Equality        Gender
                                                                      Equity
Commission which shall have offices in the Provinces and              Equality
progressively in districts.                                           Commission

  (2) The Gender Equity and Equality Commission shall promote
the attainment and mainstreaming of gender equality.
   94    No. 2 of 2016] Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (3)     The Gender Equity and Equality Commission shall—
                        (a) monitor, investigate, research, educate, advise and report
                             on issues concerning gender equality;
                        (b) ensure institutions comply with legal requirements and
                              other standards relating to gender equality;
                        (c) take steps to secure appropriate redress to complaints
                              relating to gender inequality, as prescribed; and
                        (d) perform such other functions as prescribed.

                                     Emoluments Commission
Emoluments        232.      (1) There is established the Emoluments Commission.
Commission
                   (2) The Emoluments Commission shall determine, on the
                recommendation of the relevant authority or commission, the
                emoluments of public officers, chiefs and members of the House
                of Chiefs, as provided in this Constitution or as prescribed.

                                         Lands Commission
Lands             233. (1) There is established the Lands Commission which
Commission      shall have offices in all Provinces and progressively in districts.
                   (2) The Lands Commission shall administer, manage and
                alienate land, on behalf of the President, as prescribed.

                                      State Audit Commission
State Audit       234.      (1) There is established the State Audit Commission.
Commission
                  (2) The State Audit Commission shall—
                        (a) subject to Article 249 (2) oversee the operations of the
                              office of the Auditor-General, as prescribed;
                        (b) make recommendations to the President on the appointment
                             of the Auditor-General; and
                        (c) perform such other functions as prescribed.

                                    Investigative Commissions
Investigative     235. There is established the following investigative commissions:
Commissions
                        (a) the Anti-Corruption Commission;
                        (b) the Drug Enforcement Commission; and
                        (c) the Anti-Financial and Economic Crimes Commission.
           Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016 95

                 Judicial Complaints Commission
  236. (1) There is established the Judicial Complaints Commission.          Judicial
                                                                             Complaints
  (2)     The Judicial Complaints Commission shall—                          Commission

        (a) enforce the Code of Conduct for judges and judicial
             officers;
        (b) ensure that judges and judicial officers are accountable to
              the people for the performance of their functions;
        (c) receive complaints lodged against a judge or judicial officer,
              as prescribed;
        (d) hear a complaint against a judge or judicial officer, as
             prescribed;
        (e) make recommendations to the appropriate institution or
             authority for action; and
        (f) perform such other functions as prescribed.

              Police Public Complaints Commission
  237. (1) There is established the Police Public Complaints                 Police Public
                                                                             Complaints
Commission.                                                                  Commission
  (2)     The Police Public Complaints Commission shall—
        (a) receive and investigate complaints against police actions;
        (b) investigate complaints against police actions which result
              in serious injury or death of a person;
        (c) make recommendations to the appropriate institution or
             authority for action; and
        (d) perform such other functions as prescribed.

          General Provisions Relating to Commissions
  238. (1) A commission shall be a self-accounting institution               Financial
which deals directly with the Ministry responsible for finance in            independence
                                                                             of
matters relating to its finances.                                            commissions
  (2) A commission shall be adequately funded in a financial
year to enable it to effectively perform its functions.
  239. The expenses of a commission, including emoluments                    Expenses of
                                                                             commissions
payable to, or in respect of, persons serving with that commission,
shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
   96       No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Qualifications     240. A person qualifies to be appointed as a member of a
of members       commission if that person—
of
commissions           (a) is a citizen;
                      (b) is permanently resident in Zambia;
                      (c) has not, in the immediate preceding five years, served a
                            term of imprisonment of at least three years;
                      (d) declares that person’s assets and liabilities, as prescribed;
                      (e) has paid that person’s taxes or has made arrangements
                            satisfactory to the appropriate tax authority for the
                            payment of the taxes;
                      (f) does not have a mental or physical disability that would
                            make the person incapable of performing the functions
                            of office;
                      (g) is not serving a sentence of imprisonment for an offence
                            under a law; and
                      (h) has other qualifications, as prescribed.
General            241.   A commission—
powers of
commissions           (a) shall appoint its staff;
                      (b) may refer matters within its mandate to appropriate State
                           organs or State institutions for action;
                      (c) may initiate its own investigations and receive complaints
                           from a person on matters within its mandate;
                      (d) shall take measures to ensure that State institutions and
                            other persons comply with its decisions; and
                      (e) shall submit annual reports to the National Assembly on
                            its accounts and activities as prescribed.
Legislation         242. The functions, composition, appointment of members,
on
commissions      tenure of office of members, processes and procedures, operations,
                 administration, structures, finances and financial management of a
                 commission shall be prescribed.
                                   Other Independent Offices
                                       Public Protector
Public             243. (1) There shall be a Public Protector who shall be
Protector        appointed by the President, on the recommendation of the Judicial
                 Service Commission, subject to ratification by the National
                 Assembly.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)              [No. 2 of 2016 97

  (2) A person qualifies for appointment as Public Protector if
that person—
     (a) is qualified to be appointed as a judge; and
     (b) does not hold a State office or Constitutional office.
  (3) The office of Public Protector shall be decentralised to the
Provinces and progressively to districts, as prescribed.
  (4) The procedures, staff, finances, financial management,
administration and operations of the office of the Public Protector
shall be prescribed.
  244. (1) The Public Protector may investigate an action or            Functions of
decision taken or omitted to be taken by a State institution in the     Public
                                                                        Protector
performance of an administrative function.
  (2) For purposes of clause (1), an action or decision taken or
omitted to be taken is an action or decision which is—
     (a) unfair, unreasonable or illegal; or
     (b) not compliant with the rules of natural justice.
  (3) For purposes of clauses (1) and (2), the Public Protector
may—
     (a) bring an action before a court;
     (b) hear an appeal by a person relating to an action or decision
           taken or omitted to be taken in respect of that person;
           and
     (c) make a decision on an action to be taken against a public
           officer or Constitutional office holder, which decision
           shall be implemented by an appropriate authority.
  (4) The Public Protector shall not be subject to the direction or
control of a person or an authority in the performance of the
functions of office.
  (5) The Public Protector has the same powers as those of the
High Court in—
     (a) enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them
           on oath;
     (b) examining witnesses outside Zambia;
     (c) compelling the production of documents;
     (d) enforcing decisions issued by the Public Protector; and
     (e) citing a person or an authority for contempt for failure to
           carry out a decision.
   98       No. 2 of 2016] Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                  (6) A person summoned to give evidence or to produce a
                document before the Public Protector is entitled, in respect of that
                evidence or the production of the document, to the same privileges
                and protection as those that a person would be entitled to before a
                court.
                   (7) An answer by a person to a question put by the Public
                Protector is not admissible in evidence against that person in civil
                or criminal proceedings, except for perjury.
Limitation of     245. The Public Protector shall not investigate a matter which—
powers of
Public               (a) is before a court, court martial or a quasi-judicial body;
Protector
                     (b) relates to an officer in the Parliamentary Service or Judicial
                            Service;
                     (c) involves the relations or dealings between the Government
                           and foreign government or an international organisation;
                     (d) relates to the exercise of the prerogative of mercy; or
                     (e) is criminal in nature.
Performance        246. Where the Public Protector is absent from Zambia or is
of functions    unable to perform the functions of office due to illness or other
of Public
Protector       cause, the President shall appoint a person qualified to perform the
during          functions of the Public Protector until that appointment is revoked
absence,
illness or      or until the Public Protector returns to office.
other cause

Tenure of          247. (1) Subject to this Article, the Public Protector shall retire
office of
Public          from office on attaining the age of sixty years.
Protector
                   (2) The Public Protector may retire, with full benefits, on
                attaining the age of fifty-five years.
                  (3) The Public Protector may be removed from office on the
                same grounds and procedure as apply to a judge.
                  (4) The Public Protector may resign from office by three months’
                notice, in writing, to the President.
Report to         248. The office of the Public Protector shall report to the
National
Assembly        National Assembly on matters concerning its affairs.
                                         Auditor-General
Auditor-          249. (1) There shall be an Auditor-General who shall be
General
                appointed by the President, on the recommendation of the State
                Audit Commission, subject to ratification by the National Assembly.
      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016      99

  (2) The office of Auditor-General shall be decentralised to the
Provinces and progressively to districts, as prescribed.
  (3) The following shall be prescribed:
     (a) the qualifications of the Auditor-General;
     (b) the operations and management of the office of the
           Auditor-General;
     (c) the recruitment, supervision, grading, promotion and
           discipline of the staff of the Auditor-General; and
     (d) the finances of the office of the Auditor-General.
  250. (1) The Auditor-General shall—                                   Functions of
                                                                        Auditor-
     (a) audit the accounts of—                                         General

             (i) State organs, State institutions, provincial
                  administration and local authorities; and
             (ii) institutions financed from public funds;
     (b) audit the accounts that relate to the stocks, shares and
          stores of the Government;
     (c) conduct financial and value for money audits, including
           forensic audits and any other type of audit, in respect of
           a project that involves the use of public funds;
     (d) ascertain that money appropriated by Parliament or raised
           by the Government and disbursed—
             (i) has been applied for the purpose for which it was
                   appropriated or raised;
             (ii) was expended in conformity with the authority
                   that governs it; and
             (iii) was expended economically, efficiently and
                   effectively; and
     (e) recommend to the Director of Public Prosecutions or a
           law enforcement agency any matter within the
           competence of the Auditor-General, that may require to
           be prosecuted.
  (2) The Auditor-General shall not be subject to the direction or
control of a person or an authority in the performance of the
functions of office.
   100      No. 2 of 2016]        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Performance        251. Where the Auditor-General is absent from Zambia or is
of functions    unable to perform the functions of office due to illness or other
of Auditor-
General         cause, the President shall appoint a person qualified to perform the
during          functions of the Auditor-General until that appointment is revoked
absence,
illness or      or until the Auditor-General returns to office.
other cause

Tenure of          252. (1) Subject to this Article, the Auditor-General shall
office of
Auditor-        retire from office on attaining the age of sixty years.
General
                   (2) The Auditor-General may retire, with full benefits, on
                attaining the age of fifty-five years.
                  (3) The Auditor-General may be removed from office on the
                same grounds and procedure as apply to a judge.
                  (4) The Auditor-General may resign from office by three
                months’ notice, in writing, to the President.

                                        PART XIX
                          LAND, ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES
                                               Land
Principles of     253. (1) Land shall be held, used and managed in accordance
land policy     with the following principles:
                     (a) equitable access to land and associated resources;
                     (b) security of tenure for lawful land holders;
                     (c) recognition of indigenous cultural rites;
                     (d) sustainable use of land;
                     (e) transparent, effective and efficient administration of land;
                     (f) effective and efficient settlement of land disputes;
                     (g) river frontages, islands, lakeshores and ecologically and
                           culturally sensitive areas—
                              (i) to be accessible to the public;
                              (ii) not to be leased, fenced or sold; and
                              (iii) to be maintained and used for conservation and
                                     preservation activities;
                     (h) investments in land to also benefit local communities and
                           their economy; and
                     (i) plans for land use to be done in a consultative and
                           participatory manner.
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)              [No. 2 of 2016        101

  254. (1) Land shall be delimited and classified as State land,         Classification
                                                                         and
customary land and such other classification, as prescribed.             alienation of
                                                                         land and land
   (2) The President may, through the Lands Commission, alienate         tenure
land to citizens and non-citizens, as prescribed.
  (3) Land shall be held for a prescribed tenure.

            Environment and Natural Resources
   255. The management and development of Zambia’s                       Principles of
                                                                         environmental
environment and natural resources shall be governed by the following     and natural
principles:                                                              resources
                                                                         management
     (a) natural resources have an environmental, economic, social       and
                                                                         development
           and cultural value and this shall be reflected in their
           use;
     (b) the person responsible for polluting or degrading the
           environment is responsible for paying for the damage
           done to the environment;
     (c) where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage
          to the environment, lack of full scientific certainty shall
          not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective
          measures to prevent environmental degradation;
     (d) the conservation and protection of ecologically sensitive
           areas, habitats, species and other environment shall be
           done in a sustainable manner;
     (e) respect for the integrity of natural processes and ecological
           communities;
     (f) benefits accruing from the exploitation and utilisation of
           the environment and natural resources shall be shared
           equitably amongst the people of Zambia;
     (g) saving of energy and the sustainable use of renewable
           energy sources shall be promoted;
     (h) reclaiming and rehabilitation of degraded areas and those
           prone to disasters shall be promoted;
     (i) unfair trade practices in the production, processing,
          distribution and marketing of natural resources shall be
          eliminated;
     (j) origin, quality, methods of production, harvesting and
           processing of natural resources shall be regulated;
   102     No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                       (k) equitable access to environmental resources shall be
                            promoted;
                       (l)      effective participation of people in the development
                              of relevant policies, plans and programmes; and
                       (m) access to environmental information to enable people
                            preserve, protect and conserve the environment.
Protection of       256. A person has a duty to co-operate with State organs,
environment      State institutions and other persons to—
and natural
resources              (a) maintain a clean, safe and healthy environment;
                       (b) ensure ecologically sustainable development and use of
                             natural resources;
                       (c) respect, protect and safeguard the environment; and
                       (d) prevent or discontinue an act which is harmful to the
                            environment.
Utilisation of     257. The State shall, in the utilisation of natural resources and
natural          management of the environment—
resources
and                    (a) protect genetic resources and biological diversity;
management
of                     (b) implement mechanisms that minimise waste;
environment
                       (c) promote appropriate environment management systems
                             and tools;
                       (d) encourage public participation;
                       (e) protect and enhance the intellectual property in, and
                            indigenous knowledge of, biodiversity and genetic
                            resources of local communities;
                       (f) ensure that the environmental standards enforced in Zambia
                             are of essential benefit to citizens; and
                       (g) establish and implement mechanisms that address climate
                             change.
                                              PART XX
                                          GENERAL PROVISIONS
Official            258.     (1) The official language of Zambia is English.
language and
use and             (2) A language, other than English, may be used as a medium of
status of        instruction in educational institutions or for legislative, administrative
local
languages        or judicial purposes, as prescribed.
                    (3) The State shall respect, promote and protect the diversity of
                 the languages of the people of Zambia.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                   [No. 2 of 2016       103

   259. (1) Where a person is empowered to make a nomination                 Nominations
                                                                             and
or an appointment to a public office, that person shall ensure—              appointments
      (a) that the person being nominated or appointed has the
            requisite qualification to discharge the functions of the
            office, as prescribed or specified in public office circulars
            or establishment registers;
      (b) that fifty percent of each gender is nominated or appointed
            from the total available positions, unless it is not
            practicable to do so; and
       (c) equitable representation of the youth and persons with
            disabilities, where these qualify for nomination or
            appointment.
   (2) A person empowered to make a nomination or appointment
to a public office shall, where possible, ensure that the nomination
or appointment reflects the regional diversity of the people of
Zambia.
   260. A person assuming a public office, member of the House               Oath of
                                                                             office and
of Chiefs, and presidential appointee, shall take an Oath of Office          prescribed
and such other oath, as prescribed, before carrying out the duties           oaths
of office.
  261. A person holding a public office shall act in accordance              Code of
                                                                             conduct and
with a code of conduct and ethics, as prescribed for that office.            ethics

   262. A person holding a public office shall not act in a manner,          Conflict of
                                                                             interest
or be in a position, where the personal interest of that person conflicts,
or is likely to conflict, with the performance of the functions of
office.
   263. A person holding a public office shall, before assuming              Declaration
                                                                             of assets
office or leaving office, make a declaration of their assets and
liabilities, as prescribed.
   264. (1) A public officer, chief and member of the House of               Emoluments
                                                                             payable
Chiefs, shall be paid such emoluments as recommended by the                  under
relevant authority or commission and determined by the Emoluments            Constitution
Commission.
   (2) The emoluments of a State officer, councillor, Constitutional
office holder and a judge shall be determined by the Emoluments
Commission, as prescribed.
   104        No. 2 of 2016]      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                    (3) The emoluments of a person holding a public office, chief
                 and member of the House of Chiefs shall not be altered to the
                 disadvantage of that person during that person’s tenure of office.
                   (4) A person holding a public office shall not, while in office,
                 hold another office which pays emoluments.
Funding,             265. (1) A public office shall be adequately funded to enable
expenses and
emoluments       it to effectively perform its functions.
charge on
Consolidated        (2) The expenses of a State organ, State institution and public
Fund
                 office shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
                    (3) The emoluments payable under this Constitution or as
                 prescribed, shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.
Definitions        266. In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires—
                       “ adult ” means a person who has attained, or is above, the
                         age of nineteen years;
                      “ Bill ” means a draft of a proposed law to be enacted by
                        Parliament;
                      “ Bill of Rights ” means the human rights and fundamental
                         freedoms set out in Part III, and includes their status,
                         application, interpretation, limitations, derogations, non-
                         derogations and enforcement;
                      “ by-election ” means an election to fill a vacancy in the
                         office of a Member of Parliament or councillor;
                      “ candidate ” means a person contesting a presidential,
                        parliamentary or local government election;
                      “ chief ” means a person bestowed as chief and who derives
                         allegiance from the fact of birth or descent, in accordance
                         with the customs, traditions, usage or consent of the people
                         in a chiefdom;
                      “ child ” means a person who has attained, or is below, the
                         age of eighteen years;
                      “ circuit schedule ” means a table showing dates, districts,
                         time and place where a court is to sit and hear matters in
                         any period of twelve months;
   Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016 105

“ citizen ” means a citizen of Zambia;
“ civil servant ” means a public officer appointed by the Civil
   Service Commission;
“ civil society ” means a group of persons, who are not part
   of the Government, who associate for the purpose of
   advancing or protecting particular interests;
“ commission ” means a commission established under Part
  XVIII of this Constitution;
“ constituency ” means an area into which Zambia is divided
   for purposes of elections to the National Assembly;
“ Constitutional Court ” means the Constitutional Court
  established in this Constitution;
“ Constitutional office ” means the office of the Attorney-
  General, Solicitor-General, Director of Public Prosecutions,
  Public Protector, Auditor-General, Secretary to the Cabinet,
  Secretary to the Treasury and Permanent Secretary;
“ Constitutional office holder ” means a person holding or
  acting in a Constitutional office;
“ council ” includes a city, municipal or town council;
“ council chairperson ” means a person elected chairperson
   of a town council in accordance with Article 154;
“ councillor ” means a member of a council elected in
  accordance with Article 153;
“ court ” means a court of competent jurisdiction established
   by or under this Constitution;
“ Court of Appeal ” means the Court of Appeal established in
   this Constitution;
“ devolution ” means a form of decentralisation where there
   is a transfer of rights, functions and powers or an office
   from the central government or State institution to a sub-
   national authority or the bringing of a service that is provided
   at central government level to, or opening of a branch of a
   public office or institution at, a sub- national level, and the
   word “devolved” shall be construed accordingly;
106   No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              “ disability ” means a permanent physical, mental, intellectual
                 or sensory impairment that alone, or in combination with
                 social or environmental barriers, hinders the ability of a
                 person to fully or effectively participate in an activity or
                 perform a function as specified in this Constitution or as
                 prescribed;
              “ discrimination ” means directly or indirectly treating a person
                 differently on the basis of that person’s birth, race, sex,
                 origin, colour, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief,
                 culture, language, tribe, pregnancy, health, or marital, ethnic,
                 social or economic status;
              “ district ” means an administrative unit of a Province as
                 provided in Article 149;
              “ election ” means an election to the office of President,
                 National Assembly or a council;
              “ Electoral Commission ” means the Electoral Commission
                 of Zambia established in this Constitution;
              “ emoluments ” include salaries, allowances, benefits and
                 rights that form an individual’s remuneration for services
                 rendered, including pension benefits or other benefits on
                 retirement;
              “ Emoluments Commission ” means the Emoluments
                Commission established in this Constitution;
              “ executive authority ” means the power and the right to
                 execute executive functions;
              “ executive functions ” means the functions of the President
                 set out in this Constitution;
              “ ex-officio ” means a person who is appointed as a member
                 by virtue of office;
              “ First Deputy Speaker ” means the person elected as First
                 Deputy Speaker in accordance with Article 82 (4);
              “ freedom fighter ” means a person who fought for the
                 independence of the former protectorate of Northern
                 Rhodesia to become the Republic of Zambia;
   Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                 [No. 2 of 2016   107

“ function ” includes powers and duties;
“ gender ” means female or male and the role individuals play
   in society as a result of their sex and status;
“ general election ” means Presidential, National Assembly
   and local government elections when held on the same
   day;
“ gross misconduct ” means—
      (a) behaviour which brings a public office into disrepute,
            ridicule or contempt;
      (b) behaviour that is prejudicial or inimical to the economy
            or the security of the State;
      (c) an act of corruption; or
      (d) using or lending the prestige of an office to advance
            the private interests of that person, members of
            that person’s family or another person;
“ health practitioner ” means a person registered as a health
   practitioner as prescribed;
“ High Court ” means the High Court established in this
  Constitution;
“ individual ” means a natural person;
“ judge ” means a person appointed as a judge of a superior
   court;
“ judgment ” includes a decision, an order or decree of a
   court or an authority, as prescribed;
“ judicial authority ” means the power and right to perform
   judicial functions;
“ judicial function ” means the functions of the Judiciary set
   out in this Constitution;
“ judicial officer ” includes a magistrate, local court magistrate,
   registrar and such officers as prescribed;
“ legislative authority ” means the power and right to perform
   legislative functions;
108   No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              “ legislative functions ” means the functions of the legislature
                 set out in this Constitution;
              “ local authority ” means a council and it’s secretariat
                 consisting of persons appointed by the Local Government
                 Service Commission;
              “ local government ” means governance at the local level;
              “ local government elections tribunal ” means a tribunal
                 established in accordance with Article 159;
              “ Local Government Equalisation Fund ” means a fund
                established in accordance with Article 163;
              “ mayor ” means a person elected mayor of a city or municipal
                 council in accordance with Article 154;
              “ Member of Parliament ” means a person who is member of
                the National Assembly;
              “ Minister ” means a Cabinet Minister;
              “ oath ” includes an affirmation;
              “ older member of society ” means a person who has attained,
                 or is above, the age of sixty years;
              “ opposition ” means a political party which is not the political
                 party in government;
              “ ordinarily resident ” means residing in a place for a prescribed
                 period of time;
              “ Parliament ” means the President and the National
                Assembly;
              “ parliamentary committee ” means a committee established
                 in accordance with Article 80;
              “ pension benefit ” includes a pension, compensation, gratuity
                 or similar allowance in respect of a person’s service;
              “ person ” means an individual, a company or an association
                 of persons, whether corporate or unincorporate;
              “ person with disability ” means a person with a permanent
                 physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment;
  Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)                [No. 2 of 2016   109

“ political party ” means an association whose objectives
   include the contesting of elections in order to form
   government or influence the policy of the national or local
   government;
“ power ” includes privilege, authority and discretion;
“ prescribed ” means provided for in an Act of Parliament;
“ President-elect ” means the presidential candidate who has
   been declared by the Returning Officer as having won the
   presidential election;
“ presidential candidate ” means a person nominated to stand
   for election as President in accordance with Article 52
   (1);
“ presidential election ” means an election to the office of
   President, and includes the election of a Vice-President as
   a running mate to the President;
“ property ” includes a vested or contingent right to, or interest
   in, or arising from—
     (a) land, permanent fixtures on, or improvements to,
           land;
     (b) goods or personal property;
     (c) intellectual property; or
     (d) money, choses in action or negotiable instruments;
“ provincial administration ” means the administrative
  secretariat established in accordance with Article 150;
“ Provincial Minister ” means a person appointed Provincial
   Minister by the President;
“ public media ” means media owned, operated or controlled
   by the Government;
“ public office ” means an office whose emoluments and
   expenses are a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other
   prescribed public fund and includes a State office,
   Constitutional office and an office in the public service,
   including that of a member of a commission;
110   No. 2 of 2016]      Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              “ public officer ” means a person holding or acting in a public
                 office, but does not include a State officer, councillor, a
                 Constitutional office holder, a judge and a judicial officer;
              “ public service ” means service in the Civil Service, the
                 Teaching Service, Defence Force and National Security
                 Service, the Zambia Correctional Service, the Zambia
                 Police Service, Emoluments Commission, State Audit
                 Commission, Lands Commission, Electoral Commission,
                 Human Rights Commission, Gender Equity and Equality
                 Commission, the Anti-Corruption Commission, Drug
                 Enforcement Commission, the Anti-Financial and Economic
                 Crimes Commission, the Police and Public Complaints
                 Commission, and service as a constitutional office holder,
                 service in other offices, as prescribed;
              “ rights and freedoms ” means the human rights and
                fundamental freedoms provided for in the Bill of Rights;
              “ Republic ” means the Republic of Zambia;
              “ returning officer ” means a person who is a returning officer
                 for a parliamentary or local authority election and
                 “Returning Officer” means the Chairperson of the Electoral
                 Commission in a presidential election;
              “ running mate ” means a person who is selected by a
                 presidential candidate to stand with the presidential
                 candidate in a presidential election so that the person
                 becomes the Vice-President if that presidential candidate
                 is elected as President;
              “ Second Deputy Speaker ” means the person elected as
                Second Deputy Speaker in accordance with Article 82 (5);
              “ Service Commission ” means a commission established under
                 Articles 218, 220, 222, 224, 225, 226, and 228;
              “ session ” means a period not exceeding twelve months,
                 within the term of the National Assembly, of sittings of the
                 National Assembly, which commence on the first day of
                 sitting after a general election or prorogation of Parliament
                 and ends with a prorogation or dissolution of Parliament;
  Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016   111

“ sitting ” means a meeting of the National Assembly, within
   a session, which concludes with an adjournment, and
   includes a parliamentary committee meeting;
“ Speaker ” means the person elected Speaker of the National
   Assembly in accordance with Article 82 (1);
“ State institution ” includes a ministry or department of the
   Government, a public office, agency, institution, statutory
   body, commission or company in which the Government or
   local authority has a controlling interest, other than a State
   organ;
“ State office ” includes the office of President, Vice-
  President, Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Member of
  Parliament, Minister and Provincial Minister;
“ State officer ” means a person holding or acting in a State
   office;
“ State organ ” means the Executive, Legislature or Judiciary;
“ statutory instrument ” means a proclamation, regulation,
   rule, by-law, order or other similar legal instrument made
   under a power conferred by this Constitution or an Act of
   Parliament;
“ subordinate court ” means a court subordinate to the High
   Court;
“ sub-national ” means an administrative division of
  government at provincial or district level;
“ sub-structure ” includes a district, ward and village;
“ superior court ” means the Supreme Court, Constitutional
   Court, Court of Appeal and High Court established in
   accordance with this Constitution;
“ Supreme Court ” means the Supreme Court established in
   this Constitution;
“ tax ” includes rates, levies, charges, tariffs, fees, tolls and
   duties;
“ term ” means a period of five years commencing when the
   National Assembly first sits, after a general election, and
   ending when Parliament is dissolved;
   112      No. 2 of 2016]         Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

                       “ Treasury ” means the office, in the Ministry responsible
                         for finance, which receives, keeps, receipts, manages and
                         disburses public funds;
                      “ Vice-President-elect ” means the person declared as having
                         been duly elected as a Vice-President after a presidential
                         election;
                      “ ward ” means a unit into which a district is divided for
                        purposes of electing councillors;
                      “ young person ” means a person who has attained the age of
                         fifteen years, but is below the age of nineteen years; and
                      “ youth ” means a person who has attained the age of nineteen
                         years, but is below the age of thirty-five years.
Interpretation     267. (1) This Constitution shall be interpreted in accordance
of
Constitution     with the Bill of Rights and in a manner that—
                      (a) promotes its purposes, values and principles;
                      (b) permits the development of the law; and
                      (c) contributes to good governance.
                   (2) If there is a conflict between the English version of this
                 Constitution and a different language version, the English version
                 shall prevail.
                     (3) A provision of this Constitution shall be construed according
                 to the doctrine that the law is continuously in force and accordingly—
                      (a) a function may be performed, as occasion requires, by
                            the person holding the office to which the function is
                            assigned;
                      (b) a reference to a person holding an office includes a
                           reference to the person lawfully performing the functions
                           of that office at a particular time;
                      (c) a reference to an office, State organ, State institution or
                            locality shall be read with any modification necessary
                            to make it applicable in the circumstances;
                      (d) a reference in a provision applying that provision to another
                             provision shall be read with any modification necessary
                             to make it applicable in the circumstances and any
                             reference to the modified provision shall apply as
                             modified; and
          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)              [No. 2 of 2016       113

      (e) a reference to an office, body or organisation, where that
            office, body or organisation has ceased to exist, is a
            reference to its successor or to the equivalent office,
            body or organisation performing the functions.
   (4) A provision of this Constitution to the effect that a person,
an authority or institution is not subject to the direction or control of
a person or an authority in the performance of a function, does not
preclude a court from exercising jurisdiction in relation to a question
as to whether that person, authority or institution has performed
the function in accordance with this Constitution or other laws.
   268.    In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise requires—     Grammatical
                                                                            variation
      (a) a word in the singular includes the plural and a word in
            the plural includes the singular; and
      (b) a word or expression defined, shall be read with any
            grammatical variation or similar expression of that word
            or expression.
  269. For the purposes of this Constitution, in computing time,            Computation
                                                                            of time
unless a contrary intention is expressed—
      (a) a period of days from the happening of an event or the
            doing of an act shall be considered to be exclusive of
            the day on which the event happens or the act is done;
      (b) if the last day of the period is a Saturday, Sunday or public
             holiday (“excluded day”), the period shall include the
             next day;
      (c) where an act or a proceeding is directed or allowed to be
           done or taken on a specified day and that day is an
           excluded day, the act or proceeding shall be considered
           as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken the
           next day; and
      (d) where an act or a proceeding is directed or allowed to be
           done or taken within a time not exceeding six days, an
           excluded day shall not be counted in the computation of
           the time.
   114     No. 2 of 2016]          Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

Power to            270. In this Constitution, unless a contrary intention is
appoint          expressed, power to appoint a person to hold or act in an office
includes
power to         includes the power to confirm appointments, to exercise disciplinary
remove           control over the person holding or acting in the office and to remove
                 that person from office.
Implied             271. In this Constitution, a power given to a person or an
power
                 authority to do or enforce the doing of an act, includes the necessary
                 and ancillary powers to enable that person or authority to do or
                 enforce the doing of the act.
Legislation        272. Parliament may enact legislation to give effect to an
to give effect
to               Article or a provision in this Constitution which—
Constitution
                      (a) confers a function or jurisdiction on a person, office,
                           institution, council or commission;
                      (b) provides for a process or procedure to be taken, followed
                            or prescribed;
                      (c) requires an action, a measure or decision to be taken or
                            provided;
                      (d) requires a remedy or compensation to be given;
                      (e) prohibits an action or measure;
                      (f) deals with a specific subject-matter or general matter that
                            would require to be legislated on in order to give effect
                            to the Constitution; or
                      (g) generally requires something to be prescribed.
Power to            273. In this Constitution, a power conferred on a person or an
make
statutory
                 authority to make a statutory instrument, a resolution or direction,
instrument,      includes the power to amend or revoke the statutory instrument,
resolution or    resolution or direction.
direction

Time for           274. A function conferred in this Constitution may be
performance      performed as occasion requires.
of function

Exercise of        275. Where an Article provides for a power exercisable by
power            making a statutory instrument to—
between
publication           (a) make an appointment; or
and
commencement          (b) do any other thing for the purposes of the Article;
of Acts
                 the power may be exercised at any time on or after the date of
                 publication of the statutory instrument in the Gazette.
       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)            [No. 2 of 2016 115

                            ANNEX
                       (Article 147 (2))
 FUNCTIONS OF NATIONAL, PROVINCIAL AND LOCAL LEVELS OF
                DEVOLVED GOVERNMENT
A.   Exclusive national functions
     · Elections
     · Foreign and international affairs
     · Budget
     · Taxation including customs and excise
     · Airports, other than district airports
     · Casinos, racing, gambling and wagering, excluding lotteries
       and sports pools
     · Disaster management and public emergency
     · National parks, national botanical gardens and resources
     · National forests
     · passports and National Registration
     · Prisons
     · Refugees
     · Registration of Births and Deaths
     · Wildlife
     · Water resources management
     · Energy and hydro electricity
     · Petroleum and lubricants
     · Public roads
     · Defence, security, maintenance of law and order
     · Citizenship and immigration
     · Public enterprises
     · Regulation of commerce and manufacturing
     · Road traffic regulation
     · Land, mines, minerals and natural resources
     · Census and statistics
     · Traditional leadership
     · National archives
     · National libraries
     · National museums
     · Tertiary Education
116   No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

         B.   Concurrent national and provincial functions
              · administration of justice
              · legal affairs
              · Administration of forests
              · Agriculture
              · Animal control and diseases
              · Consumer protection
              · Cultural matters
              · Customary law
              · Education at all levels, excluding tertiary education
              · Environmental management
              · Health services
              · Housing
              · Industrial promotion
              · Language policy and the regulation of official languages
              · Nature conservation
              · Parliamentary Business
              · legislative procedures and processess
              · Pollution control
              · Population development
              · Property transfer tax
              · Public procurement
              · Public transport
              · Public works only in respect of the needs of provincial
                 administration
              · Provincial spatial planning and development
              · Soil conservation
              · Tourism, trade and commerce
              · Urban and rural development
              · Welfare services
              · Industrial and labour relations
              · Resettlement
              · Investment
              · Telecommunication
        Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)               [No. 2 of 2016   117

C.   Local Authorities exclusive functions
     · Pollution control
     · Building regulations
     · Child-care facilities
     · Electricity
     · Fire fighting services
     · Local tourism
     · District airports, Aerodromes and Airships
     · District planning
     · District health services
     · District public transport
     · District public works only in respect of the needs of Districts
       in the discharge of councils responsibilities to administer
       functions specifically assigned to them under this Constitution
       or other law
     · Levies, tariffs and tolls
     · Pontoons, ferries, jetties, piers and harbours, excluding the
       regulation of international and national shipping and matters
       related thereto
     · Storm water management systems in built-up areas
     · Trading
     · Water and sanitation services limited to potable water supply
       systems and domestic waste-water and sewage disposal
       systems
     · Veterinary services, excluding regulation of the veterinary
        profession
     · Vehicle licensing
     · Abattoirs
     · Ambulance services
     · Archives
     · Libraries
     · Liquor licencing
     · Museums
118   No. 2 of 2016]       Constitution of Zambia (Amendment)

              · Local spatial planning
              · Cultural matters
              · Recreation and amenities
              · Sport
              · Roads and traffic automation and maintenance
              · Amusement facilities
              · Billboards and the display of advertisements in public places
              · Cemeteries, funeral parlours and crematoria
              · Local cleansing
              · Control of public nuisances
              · Control of undertakings that sell liquor to the public
              · Facilities for the accommodation, care and burial of animals
              · Fencing and fences
              · Licensing of dogs
              · Licensing and control of undertakings that sell food to the
                 public
              · Local amenities
              · Local sport facilities
              · Markets
              · Local parks and recreation
              · Local roads
              · Noise pollution
              · Pounds
              · Public places
              · Refuse removal, refuse dumps and solid waste disposal
              · Street trading
              · Street lighting
              · Traffic and parking
              · Gardens and landscaping
